S A R S
How a global epidemic
    was stopped




                         SARS: How a global
                        epidemic was stopped   i
                     WHO Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
                     SARS: how a global epidemic was stopped


                       1. Severe acute respiratory syndrome -- prevention and control. 2. Disease
                     outbreaks -- prevention and control.


                        ISBN 92 9061 213 4       (NLM Classification:WC 505)


                     © World Health Organization 2006
                     All rights reserved.

                     The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not
                     imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization
                     concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or
                     concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted lines on maps represent
                     approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement.

                     The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that
                     they are endorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to
                     others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names
                     of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.

                     The World Health Organization does not warrant that the information contained in this
                     publication is complete and correct and shall not be liable for any damages incurred as a
                     result of its use.

                     Publications of the World Health Organization can be obtained from WHO Press, World
                     Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel: +41 22 791 2476;
                     fax: +41 22 791 4857; email: bookorders@who.int). Requests for permission to reproduce
                     WHO publications, in part or in whole, or to translate them – whether for sale or for
                     noncommercial distribution – should be addressed to Publications, at the above address
                     (fax: +41 22 791 4806; email: permissions@who.int). For WHO Western Pacific Regional
                     Publications, request for permission to reproduce should be addressed to Publications
                     Office, World Health Organization, Regional Office for the Western Pacific, P.O. Box 2932,
                     1000, Manila, Philippines (fax: (632) 521-1036; email: publications@wpro.who.int)


     SARS: How a global
ii   epidemic was stopped
                            CONTENTS
Overview ....................................................................................................... vii
   Dr Shigeru Omi, Regional Director for the Western Pacific


Part I: Overall perspectives ............................................................................. 1
     1.       SARS chronology ............................................................................. 3
              Floyd Whaley, Osman David Mansoor
     2.       Coordinating the global response .................................................. 49
              David L Heymann, Mary Kay Kindhauser, Guénaël Rodier
     3.       Response of the Western Pacific Regional Office ......................... 56
              Robert Condon, Mahomed Patel
     4.       Surveillance ................................................................................... 67
              Rosanne Muller


Part II: Country and area perspectives ......................................................... 71
     5.       China: from denial to mass mobilization ...................................... 73
              Mangai Balasegaram, Alan Schnur
     6.       Hong Kong (China): hospitals under siege .................................... 86
              Mary Ann Benitez
     7.       Viet Nam: tough decisions pay off ................................................ 94
              Pascale Brudon, Maria Cheng
     8.       Singapore: waves of transmission ................................................ 101
              Stephen Lambert
     9.       Taiwan, China: from control to outbreak .................................... 109
              Susan Maloney, Babatunde Olowokure
     10.      The Philippines: how contact tracing worked ............................ 115
              Jean-Marc Olivé
     11.      Mongolia: impact of a small outbreak ......................................... 122
              Wiwat Rojanapithayakorn
     12.      Canada: how a hospital coped .................................................... 126
              Carolyn Abraham




                                                                                                     SARS: How a global
                                                                                                    epidemic was stopped   iii
            Part III: Outbreaks ...................................................................................... 133
                 13.     The first super-spreading event .................................................... 135
                         Mangai Balasegaram
                 14.     Solving the Metropole Hotel mystery .......................................... 141
                         Floyd Whaley
                 15.     Flight CA112: facing the spectre of in-flight transmission ........... 149
                         Floyd Whaley
                 16.     Lockdown at Amoy Gardens ....................................................... 155
                         Floyd Whaley
                 17.     Panic at Pasir Panjang market ..................................................... 163
                         Floyd Whaley
                 18.     The Hanoi-French Hospital: Dr Urbani’s alert ............................ 167
                         Floyd Whaley


            Part IV: The science of SARS ....................................................................... 173
                 19.     Clinical features ........................................................................... 175
                         Joseph Jao-Yiu Sung
                 20.     Epidemiology ............................................................................... 185
                         Angela Merianos, Aileen Plant
                 21.     Animal coronaviruses .................................................................. 199
                         Linda Saif
                 22.     The SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) .............................................. 210
                         Malik Peiris, Leo Poon, John S Mackenzie
                 23.     Laboratory diagnostics ................................................................. 218
                         Christian Drosten, Katrin Leitmeyer
                 24.     The animal connection ................................................................ 225
                         Andrea Ellis, Yi Guan, Elizabeth Miranda
                 25.     SARS vaccine development ......................................................... 230
                         Marie-Paule Kieny, Saladin Osmanov
                 26.     Biocontainment and biosafety issues ........................................... 234
                         John S Mackenzie, Babatunde Olowokure


            Part V. The way forward ............................................................................. 241
                 27.     What did we learn from SARS? ................................................... 243
                         Brian Doberstyn




     SARS: How a global
iv   epidemic was stopped
Appendices .................................................................................................. 255
     1:       WHO issues a global alert about cases of atypical pneumonia .. 257
     2:       WHO issues emergency travel advisory ...................................... 259
     3:       Affected areas and patterns of local transmission ....................... 262
     4:       Case definitions for surveillance of severe acute respiratory ...... 265
              syndrome (SARS) (revised 1 MAY 2003)
     5:       People who worked on SARS response, ...................................... 269
              February to July 2003
Acknowledgements .....................................................................................281
About the authors ....................................................................................... 283
Glossary ..................................................................................................... 288
Acronymns ................................................................................................... 297
Index          ..................................................................................................... 299




                                                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                                                       epidemic was stopped   v
     SARS: How a global
vi   epidemic was stopped
                     OVERVIEW
    SARS shook the world. By some standards, the first emerging and readily
transmissible disease of the 21st century was not a big killer, but it caused more
fear and social disruption than any other outbreak of our time. As I write these
words some two years later, memories of how Member States, our partner
agencies, and we at the World Health Organization responded to this new threat
to global health are still fresh in my mind.
    Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) was unique. It showed explosive
power, setting off multiple outbreaks around the world, often zeroing in on
hospitals, attacking doctors and nurses and bringing some public-health systems
to their knees. It buckled economies, crippled international trade and travel,
and sent stock markets into a slide.
    More than 95% of the SARS cases took place in WHO’s Western Pacific
Region, where 12 countries or areas were hit, some with devastating force. All
of them responded with courage and determination, from the leaders of
government through public-health managers to health-care workers and
laboratory experts. Many people pushed themselves to the limit, taking sleep
only when going on without it would have been impossible. Family life was put
on hold. Meals were scrambled affairs and often missed altogether.
    I proposed this book because I believe that by identifying the successes and
failures of the fight against SARS, our Member States, partners, and WHO will
leave an enduring legacy for those who face similar challenges in the future.
Already, since SARS, avian influenza has spread across South-East Asia and
beyond to pose a new threat to mankind. What will come next? There is, of
course, no way of knowing, but one thing is certain: We must all be better
prepared than we were when SARS was unleashed.
    One way we can do that is to better understand why the SARS coronavirus
and the avian influenza H5N1 virus crossed the species barrier from animals to
attack humans. What caused this strange migration? The explanation, in my
view, lies in part in the way animals are raised for food in Asia, where increasing
prosperity has led to a greater demand for meat, and, in some cultures, a taste
for the flesh of exotic animals.
    In markets where wild animals are sold for the table, creatures that would
never meet in their natural habitat are kept in proximity to one another, setting
the conditions for the emergence of new viruses. A similar threat lies in the way
that chickens, ducks, and pigs are raised together, often in unhygienic conditions
and usually with no barriers between them and humans. Such husbandry practices
must change, or more viruses are likely to emerge from the animal world.


                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   vii
                  I don’t know if one can decently say that SARS had a silver lining, but if it
              did, it was that it awakened the global public-health community from a kind of
              slumber. Before SARS, communicable diseases had been given insufficient
              attention, with doctors more interested in high-tech fields such as neurosurgery
              and molecular biology. Awareness levels were low and infection-control
              procedures had become slack. In sum, public-health systems were simply not
              ready for what happened.
                  The silver lining is that since those days many countries and cities have
              invested extensively in public health. New hospitals have been built. Health-
              care workers have been drilled in infection-control measures. Better surveillance
              systems are in place. And research has been intensified. SARS, for all the fear
              and suffering it caused, has left public-health systems greatly improved.
                  SARS was the first emerging disease of the age of globalization. I believe
              that, had it occurred in a time before mass international travel, it would probably
              have remained a localized problem, with few consequences for global health.
              But the virus travelled around the world on passenger jets [see the account in
              Chapter 15 of the consequences of one single flight between Hong Kong and
              Beijing], making it a true disease of the 21st century. To fight this 21st-century
              disease, Member States applied 19th-century measures such as contact tracing,
              quarantine, and isolation. As old fashioned and labour intensive as they were,
              these measures slowed the virus’s spread, and, in the end, contributed to its
              containment.
                  But we also had a very modern ally: the Internet. Thousands of email messages
              flashed around the globe each day. Web pages not only kept the world informed
              daily, but also offered advice on scores of technical issues. At the same time,
              international laboratory experts set aside their traditional rivalries and grouped
              their expertise in a virtual network to decode the virus’s secrets. So successful
              was this unprecedented scientific cooperation that the causative agent, the
              coronavirus, was identified within weeks, whereas it might have taken months
              or possibly even years in the days before the Internet.
                  For WHO, SARS was much more than just a medical challenge. There was
              also the political, social and economic dimension of disease to deal with,
              particularly in the area where our mission of safeguarding public health had to
              be balanced against the genuine interests of Member States. At all levels, WHO
              worked with Member States to share information and to find common ground
              in a situation that was new to all of us. On a number of occasions, this required
              liaising with senior officials, including ministers of health.
                  In the Philippines, for example, WHO had discussions with authorities after
              they expressed disappointment at being included in a list of areas with “medium”
              levels of local transmission when the outbreak there had been limited to hospitals
              and family contacts. WHO was accused of overstating the problem, and, in




       SARS: How a global
viii   epidemic was stopped
retrospect, I suspect we probably did. Like everyone else, we were learning—
and we didn’t always get things right first time.
    On 22 March 2003, I held a frank one-on-one meeting in a hotel in Hong
Kong (China) with the Minister of Health of the People’s Republic of China. I
asked for much more information and better cooperation concerning
developments in Guangdong Province, in the south of the country. We didn’t
get what we needed straight away, but as the number of cases continued to
grow, heightening concern both in China and in the international community,
things began to change. China went on to make a major contribution to the
global fight against SARS through its aggressive control measures and prompt
reporting on the situation in the country.
    My colleagues and I had occasion to talk on the telephone with the Minister
of Health of Singapore as we tried to ascertain how serious a threat the situation
there was to global public health and whether there was justification for issuing
a travel advisory against Singapore. In the end, we chose not to issue an advisory.
It was the right decision.
    The possible impact of travel advisories on the economies of affected areas
and on the morale of people living there was one of the most difficult issues of
the SARS experience. I recall a number of difficult discussions on the subject
with WHO’s Director-General at the time, Dr Gro Brundtland. In the end, we
agreed we would not be fulfilling WHO’s mandate if we did not take action
when and where we thought it necessary.
    So it was that on 1 April 2003 WHO’s office in Beijing informed the Chinese
authorities that we would be issuing an advisory that day, urging members of
the public against unnecessary travel to Guangdong Province. China replied
that it accepted the decision. At the same time, our Regional Office in Manila
informed the Hong Kong authorities that a similar announcement would be
made concerning the Special Administrative Region. The Hong Kong authorities
asked if we would wait overnight while they drew up the most comprehensive
assessment possible of the situation.
    The next day we received the updated information. We concluded that it
was not sufficiently persuasive and that the data available on the newly reported
cases suggested that travel to the area could contribute to the international
spread of SARS. The advisory went out on 2 April, in order to limit further
international spread of SARS by restricting travel to areas where there was
substantial risk to travellers. It was a very difficult decision, but WHO’s duty to
protect global health had to take precedence.
    There is no doubt that SARS was a historic challenge. And it produced an
unprecedented response from Member States. Viet Nam showed the way,
becoming the first country to be declared free of SARS, thanks to prompt
recognition of the seriousness of the problem, backed by strong political




                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   ix
           commitment. In many other Asian countries too, including Malaysia, Mongolia
           and Thailand, health authorities reacted with commendable vigour. They were
           supported unstintingly by public-health managers and workers, laboratory
           technicians and many others. I thank them for their contribution.
               Finally, I would like to pay tribute to those who lost their lives in the struggle
           against SARS. Before transmission of the virus was finally declared over on
           5 July 2004, severe acute respiratory syndrome had killed nearly 800 people.
           Among them were many brave health-care workers, including our own
           Dr Carlo Urbani, who, while working in Viet Nam in the early days of the
           outbreak, was the first to raise the alarm about the new disease. These people
           selflessly gave their lives to protect others. We are all in their debt.
               Looking back, I believe that one of the lessons that SARS taught us is that
           public health around the world has entered an era where it will need to be on
           constant guard against threats from emerging diseases. It is my hope that this
           book will help guide generations to come as they take on those challenges.




                                                      Shigeru Omi, MD, Ph.D.
                                                      Regional Director




    SARS: How a global
x   epidemic was stopped
   PART I:

  OVERALL
PERSPECTIVES




                SARS: How a global
               epidemic was stopped   1
    SARS: How a global
2   epidemic was stopped
               1 SARS
             CHRONOLOGY


    In early February 2003, an apparent outbreak of pneumonia in southern
China broke into the news. While WHO was seeking to learn more about the
new disease, the virus left China’s mainland and started its global spread. Reports
of similar outbreaks in Hanoi, Viet Nam, and Hong Kong (China) led WHO to
issue a global alert on 12 March. On 15 March, WHO issued a second alert and
travel advisory, and named the disease severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS).
Over the next several months, the virus would kill hundreds of people and
infect thousands more.
    The following is a comprehensive chronology of SARS-related events, starting
with the emergence of the new virus in November 2002. It recounts the spread
of the virus and its impact on people, describes the control measures taken, and
highlights the WHO mobilization—in individual countries, in the Region, and
around the world—to stop the epidemic.


16 NOVEMBER 2002
China           A 45-year-old man in Foshan City, Guangdong, becomes ill
                with fever and respiratory symptoms, and passes on the infection
                to four relatives. He is retrospectively identified as the first SARS
                case.1

10 DECEMBER 2002
China           A 34-year-old restaurant chef working in Shenzhen becomes ill
                when admitted to Heyuan City People’s Hospital. Eight health-
                care workers who have close contact with him will develop the
                same illness.

2 JANUARY 2003
China           The Guangdong Health Bureau receives reports from Heyuan
                City People’s Hospital, saying that it had admitted two
                pneumonia cases. Because the cases are not getting better in
                Heyuan, they are transferred for treatment to Guangzhou

                                                                         SARS: How a global
                                                                        epidemic was stopped   3
                           General Army Hospital and Guangzhou Medical University
                           Respiratory Diseases Institute. In the afternoon, epidemiologists
                           and clinical experts from Guangdong Health Bureau go to
                           Heyuan to investigate the situation and provide guidance on
                           treatment.

           China           A 49-year-old office worker in Guangzhou City, Guangdong
                           becomes ill.1 By the end of January the number of new cases in
                           Guangzhou will start to increase exponentially.

           8 JANUARY
           China           A 26-year-old driver for an animal dealer in Guangxi Province
                           (next to Guangdong) becomes ill and infects several family
                           members.1

           18 JANUARY
           China           In the early evening, the Guangdong Health Bureau receives
                           reports from Zhongshan, similar to those from Heyuan. Two
                           hours later, Health Department experts arrive in Zhongshan to
                           start an investigation.

           20 JANUARY
           China           At the recommendation of the Guangdong Health Bureau, the
                           Guangdong Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
                           sends a letter to China CDC inviting its experts to provide
                           guidance in Guangdong.

           21 JANUARY
           China           In the morning, the Guangdong Health Bureau meets with
                           experts to analyse the prevention and control work of the
                           outbreak. A decision is made to send provincial treatment and
                           prevention teams to Zhongshan. The teams are dispatched at
                           11:30 a.m. To support the work of the provincial teams, Foshan
                           and Heyuan health bureaus are asked to send doctors who have
                           treated cases together with the medical records. In the afternoon,
                           a team of four experts from China CDC arrives in Guangdong to
                           help with the investigation and provide guidance on prevention
                           and control.




    SARS: How a global
4   epidemic was stopped
23 JANUARY
China         The Guangdong Health Bureau releases an official document
              on atypical pneumonia, giving a case definition and
              recommending control actions. The document, Investigation
              Reports of Pneumonia Cases of Unknown Cause in Zhongshan,
              is sent to health bureaus and medical institutions in the province,
              prefecture level and above.

30 JANUARY
China         First known super-spreading event takes place
              Mr ZZF, a 44-year-old seafood seller, is hospitalized in
              Guangzhou. He will pass on the virus to at least 50 hospital staff
              members and 19 relatives [see Chapter 13].2

9 FEBRUARY
China         The Vice-Minister of Health and the Deputy Director-General
              of Health (Disease Control Division) lead a team of experts from
              the Ministry of Health and China CDC to Guangdong to provide
              guidance on the prevention and control work.

10 FEBRUARY
China         The WHO country office in Beijing receives an email message
              describing a “strange contagious disease” that “already left more
              than 100 people dead in Guangdong Province in the space of
              one week”. The Global Public Health Intelligence Network
              (GPHIN) also picks up media reports of an unusual epidemic of
              fatal pneumonia-like illness in Guangdong.

11 FEBRUARY
China         Guangdong health authorities report on an outbreak of atypical
              pneumonia that has sickened 305 people
              At a morning press conference, the Guangzhou Vice-Mayor
              announces that the city is coping with an epidemic of atypical
              pneumonia and that no extraordinary measures are needed. Later
              that day, the Guangdong Health Bureau holds a press conference
              to report 305 cases (including five deaths) of atypical pneumonia
              of unknown cause in the province, between 16 November 2002
              and 9 February 2003. A third of the cases are health workers
              who contracted the disease while caring for patients.




                                                                     SARS: How a global
                                                                    epidemic was stopped   5
           Hong Kong       The Department of Health closely monitors the local situation
                           and finds no unusual pattern of influenza-like illness or
                           respiratory tract infection including pneumonia through the
                           established surveillance system. A working group is formed to
                           step up surveillance and advise on pneumonia cases.

           12 FEBRUARY
           China           The WHO Representative informs the Ministry of Health that
                           WHO Headquarters and the Regional Office have learned of
                           the outbreak in Guangdong, requests the Ministry in writing for
                           epidemiological information, and offers WHO’s assistance.

           Hong Kong       Hospitals begin to report suspected or confirmed cases of severe
                           community-acquired pneumonia (requiring assisted ventilation
                           or treatment in intensive care units) to the Department of Health
                           for investigation.

           14 FEBRUARY
           China           The Ministry of Health officially informs WHO that the
                           Guangdong outbreak is coming under control. The letter from
                           the Ministry states that the cause of the outbreak is still not known
                           but is probably viral. Pulmonary anthrax, pneumonic plague,
                           leptospirosis, and haemorrhagic fever [which implies Hantavirus
                           infection in China] have been ruled out. The letter also states
                           that six municipalities in Guangdong Province (Foshan, Heyuan,
                           Zhongshan, Jiangmen, Guangzhou, Shenzhen) have reported
                           cases, but no new ones in the first three localities. The
                           information from the Ministry of Health is posted on the WHO
                           website, 3 and reported in WHO’s Weekly Epidemiological
                           Record.4

           17 FEBRUARY
           China           The WHO Representative writes a follow-up letter to the Ministry
                           of Health, requesting more detailed epidemiological information
                           and again offering WHO’s assistance.

           19 FEBRUARY
           China           The Ministry of Health replies to WHO’s earlier letters: “It is
                           almost ascertained that the causal agent for the atypical
                           pneumonia outbreak in Guangdong is Chlamydia… [The]




    SARS: How a global
6   epidemic was stopped
   Figure 1.1 Guangdong epidemic curve, by date of onset, showing
           cases among community and health-care workers




Source: Xu R-H et al1


                    Guangdong Provincial Health Bureau is collecting, sorting out,
                    and analysing the [epidemiological data]. We will keep you
                    informed of the further developments in due course … [and]
                    take this opportunity to express our appreciation to WHO for
                    providing the relevant information to the international
                    community.”

Hong Kong           A possible cause for the outbreak emerges in Hong Kong when
                    the avian influenza A(H5N1) virus is detected in a nine-year-
                    old boy. The boy’s family had been visiting Fujian Province,
                    China when he fell ill. His father died on 17 February from an
                    infection with the same virus.5 His sister died in Fujian on 4
                    February, presumably also from H5N1 infection, but was not
                    tested for the virus. The case was immediately reported to WHO.

20 FEBRUARY
China               WHO’s Regional Director of the Western Pacific Regional Office
                    calls the Ministry of Health to request permission for a WHO
                    team to investigate the Guangdong outbreak. The Ministry asks
                    WHO in writing to develop terms of reference for the
                    investigating team, specifying its members, the timing of the
                    visit, and the places to be visited [see 24 February].




                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                       epidemic was stopped   7
           21 FEBRUARY
           Hong Kong       Index case of the Metropole Hotel outbreak arrives from
                           Guangdong; international spread of virus begins
                           Professor LJL, a 64-year-old physician from Guangzhou, arrives
                           (infected with the SARS virus) to attend a wedding. He developed
                           flu-like symptoms on 15 February, having been infected in the
                           hospital where he worked [see 30 January]. At least 16 other
                           guests and one visitor are infected during his one-night stay in
                           room 911 of the Metropole Hotel.

           22 FEBRUARY
           Hong Kong       Professor LJL is admitted to the intensive care unit of the Kwong
                           Wah Hospital for respiratory failure. Besides the hotel guests,
                           three members of his family (wife, daughter, brother-in-law)
                           and one nurse at the hospital are infected. Professor LJL will die
                           on 4 March.

           Hong Kong       A 49-year-old woman is transferred to the intensive care unit of
                           Prince of Wales Hospital when her respiratory symptoms worsen;
                           she was admitted to Union Hospital on 17 February on her
                           return from Guangzhou. After being notified, the Hong Kong
                           Department of Health investigated her contacts and followed
                           them up. Blood tests will confirm that she has SARS and has
                           passed it on to one of four family contacts and one nurse at
                           Union Hospital.

           23 FEBRUARY
           China           WHO team arrives in Beijing to assist WHO country office.

           24 FEBRUARY
           China           The WHO Regional Office faxes proposed terms of reference
                           for the investigating team for the H5N1 and Guangdong
                           outbreaks to the Ministry of Health. WHO proposes sending
                           three WHO experts to carry out the investigation, first in Beijing
                           and then in Fujian and Guangdong provinces. On 27 February,
                           China will agree to only the Beijing phase of the investigation.

           26 FEBRUARY
           Viet Nam        Hanoi index case is hospitalized
                           Mr JC, a 48-year-old merchandise manager from New York, is
                           admitted to the Hanoi-French Hospital. He arrived in Viet Nam
                           on 23 February after travelling to China and Hong Kong. Since

    SARS: How a global
8   epidemic was stopped
            his arrival, he has had fever and respiratory symptoms. The WHO
            office in Viet Nam will be notified of the case the next morning,
            and its advice sought.

China       A team in Beijing’s Academy of Military Medical Sciences
            identifies the coronavirus from samples taken from Guangdong
            patients with atypical pneumonia.6 As Chlamydia is generally
            believed in China to be the cause, this finding is not publicized
            and WHO is not informed.

1 MARCH
Singapore   Singapore index case is hospitalized
            Ms EM is admitted to Tan Tock Seng Hospital with pneumonia.
            She has been unwell since returning from a shopping trip to
            Hong Kong on 25 February. The 22-year-old, who stayed in
            room 938 at the Metropole Hotel [see 21 February], will pass
            on the virus to 22 close contacts.

2 MARCH
China       First Beijing index case is hospitalized
            A 27-year-old businesswoman from Shanxi Province is admitted
            to a military hospital in Beijing, and later transferred to an
            infectious-disease hospital. She is believed to be the first imported
            case in Beijing [see Chapter 6].7 She developed symptoms on
            22 February in Guangdong and sought medical attention in
            Shanxi, passing on the virus to two doctors and a nurse there, as
            well as to 10 health workers at the two Beijing hospitals, and to
            eight friends and members of her family, including her parents,
            both of whom will die from SARS.

Hong Kong   A 72-year-old Canadian tourist is admitted to St Paul’s Hospital.
            He was infected during his stay at the Metropole Hotel. He will
            pass on the virus to three health workers, five visitors, and one
            patient at St Paul’s. Two family contacts of these cases will also
            be infected. On 8 March, he will be transferred to the intensive
            care unit of Queen Mary Hospital, where no further transmissions
            will be recorded.

3 MARCH
Viet Nam    Dr Urbani examines Hanoi index case
            In Hanoi, WHO’s communicable disease expert in Viet Nam,
            Dr Carlo Urbani, examines Mr JC, the American businessman


                                                                     SARS: How a global
                                                                    epidemic was stopped   9
                            who was admitted to the Hanoi-French Hospital on 26 February
                            with a severe form of pneumonia. Dr Urbani sends a report to
                            WHO’s Regional Office, emphasizes the need for strict infection
                            controls, and arranges for Mr JC’s serum and throat swabs to be
                            sent to laboratories in Tokyo, Atlanta, and Hanoi.

            China           The WHO team, one week after its arrival, starts discussing the
                            H5N1 and Guangdong outbreaks with China’s Ministry of Health
                            [see 24 February].

            4 MARCH
            Hong Kong       Index case of outbreak at Prince of Wales Hospital is
                            hospitalized
                            A 26-year-old airport worker, Mr CT, is admitted to ward 8A of
                            Prince of Wales Hospital with pneumonia. He has had fever,
                            chills, and rigours since 24 February. His fever and chest
                            condition gradually improves after admission and his case is
                            never categorized as a severe community-acquired pneumonia.
                            Hence, the case is not reported and infection-control measures
                            are not applied. Mr CT was infected when visiting the Metropole
                            Hotel. He will pass on the virus to 143 Hong Kong residents:
                            50 health workers, 17 medical students, 30 patients in ward
                            8A, 42 visitors to ward 8A, and four members of his family.

            5 MARCH
            Viet Nam        Hanoi outbreak begins
                            In Hanoi, four health-care workers are hospitalized and two
                            more are ill. Their symptoms are similar to those of Mr JC, with
                            whom they were in close contact. By the end of the day, seven
                            hospital staff have been hospitalized. The WHO Representative
                            calls the manager of the Hanoi-French Hospital, who is currently
                            in France, and asks him to return to deal with a situation that is
                            rapidly becoming alarming.

            Canada          Toronto index case dies
                            Ms KSC, 78 years old, dies in her Toronto, Ontario, home. The
                            death certificate attributes her death to heart attack. In fact, she
                            died from SARS acquired at the Metropole Hotel in Hong Kong.
                            Before dying, she has passed the virus on to four members of
                            her extended family, who will then spark the Toronto outbreak.




     SARS: How a global
10   epidemic was stopped
6 MARCH
Hong Kong   Mr JC, the Hanoi index case who has been medically evacuated,
            arrives at the Princess Margaret Hospital, where he will die on
            13 March. The WHO Regional Office informs Hong Kong and
            Singapore officials about his transfer. Singapore is informed
            because the medical evacuation team is from Singapore. Because
            of strict infection controls, no health worker in the Princess
            Margaret Hospital is infected by Mr JC.

China       The WHO team meets at the China CDC (6–7 March) and
            receives clinical, epidemiological, and laboratory information
            from the investigations on H5N1 in Fujian and the Guangdong
            outbreak. All agree that the Guangdong outbreak is unlikely to
            be caused by influenza A(H5N1). The Ministry of Health and
            China CDC again mention Chlamydia as the possible cause.

Singapore   Three Singapore cases are identified and isolated
            The Ministry of Health receives reports that three travellers from
            Hong Kong have developed atypical pneumonia. The Ministry
            advises hospitals to isolate these three patients and to take
            infection-control measures for any new cases of atypical
            pneumonia.

7 MARCH
Viet Nam    Alarming situation evolves in Hanoi
            The situation is rapidly escalating, with 12 Hanoi-French Hospital
            staff now hospitalized and more falling ill. Three of six employees
            at Mr JC’s office also have high fever. The WHO Representative
            writes to the Ministry of Health and Hanoi-French Hospital,
            urging them to control the outbreak by creating a task force,
            strengthening infection controls, and closing the hospital to other
            patients. WHO sends out an alert about the Hanoi outbreak to
            the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN)
            and requests assistance.

WHO         Regional Office mobilizes
            The WHO Western Pacific Regional Office forms an ad hoc
            team to deal with the developing emergency. The team is
            composed at first of staff members recruited from other parts of
            the Combating Communicable Disease Division. The team will
            continue to grow to respond to the outbreaks [see Chapter 3].



                                                                   SARS: How a global
                                                                  epidemic was stopped   11
                            The country offices will also start to mobilize, and daily
                            teleconferences will be held between the country offices in
                            outbreak sites, the Regional Office, and Headquarters.

            Canada          Mr TCK, the 44-year-old son of Ms KSC [see 5 March], arrives at
                            the emergency department of Scarborough Hospital, Grace
                            division, in Toronto. He complains of high fever, severe cough,
                            and breathing difficulties. While waiting 18 to 20 hours to be
                            admitted, he passes on the virus to three other people in the
                            emergency department. Mr TCK is isolated after a respirologist
                            suspects tuberculosis.

            Canada          Mr CKL, a 55-year-old former guest at the Metropole Hotel in
                            Hong Kong, is admitted to Vancouver General Hospital. Because
                            of his travel history, infection-control procedures are
                            implemented. The virus does not spread in Vancouver.

            9 MARCH
            Viet Nam        WHO convinces the Vice-Minister of Health that urgent action
                            is needed. The Ministry of Health agrees to the visit of WHO’s
                            Regional Adviser for Communicable Disease and an influenza
                            expert from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
                            in the United States of America to help investigate the outbreak.
                            They will arrive on 10 and 11 March, respectively.

            10 MARCH
            Hong Kong       Outbreak at Prince of Wales Hospital begins
                            Seven doctors and four nurses from ward 8A in the Prince of
                            Wales Hospital report sick. Management immediately closes the
                            ward to patients and visitors.

            China           The WHO team, in a debriefing at the Ministry of Health,
                            recommends further investigation in Guangdong and Fujian.
                            WHO informs the Ministry about the Hanoi outbreak, which
                            appears similar to the ongoing Guangdong outbreak, and about
                            the trips of the index case (Mr JC) to Shanghai and Hong Kong.

            Viet Nam        At least 22 staff members of the Hanoi-French Hospital are ill;
                            20 have pneumonia, and one of these is in critical condition.




     SARS: How a global
12   epidemic was stopped
11 MARCH
Hong Kong   Department of Health investigates Prince of Wales outbreak;
            WHO is notified
            The Department of Health interviews 26 of 36 staff members on
            sick leave. By the end of the day, 50 are on sick leave. All are
            recalled for medical examination, and 23 are hospitalized and
            isolated. The Department continues active case finding and
            disease surveillance in collaboration with the Prince of Wales
            Hospital. WHO is officially notified of the outbreak, and alarm
            bells ring: outbreaks in Guangdong, Hong Kong, and Viet Nam
            all have similar features.

China       The WHO Director-General contacts the WHO Representative
            to express the Member States’ concern about the lack of
            information from China about the Guangdong outbreak. She
            asks the WHO Representative to express these concerns to the
            Minister of Health.

Viet Nam    Dr Urbani leaves for Bangkok, where he is to give a presentation
            at a meeting on tropical diseases the next day. He has a fever
            and is immediately isolated and hospitalized on arrival. He
            infects no other passengers on his flight or health workers.

12 MARCH
WHO         WHO issues first global alert
            Increasingly concerned about the evolving outbreak in Hanoi,
            and prompted by the Prince of Wales outbreak reported by Hong
            Kong, WHO issues a rare global alert about atypical pneumonia.8
            WHO informs national health authorities about cases of acute
            respiratory syndrome with unknown aetiology in Viet Nam, Hong
            Kong, and Guangdong, which appear to place health workers
            at high risk. [See Appendix 1 for the full text of the press release.]

            At the WHO Regional Office in Manila, the first of many people
            who will come to help combat SARS throughout the Region
            arrives.

China       The WHO Representative requests a meeting with the Health
            Minister to convey the concerns of the Director-General and
            Member States and to request more information about the
            Guangdong outbreak.



                                                                      SARS: How a global
                                                                     epidemic was stopped   13
            Viet Nam        The WHO team holds an emergency meeting with the Vice-
                            Minister of Health and Ministry of Health officials to recommend
                            ways of controlling the outbreak. The influenza expert explains
                            that Dr Urbani’s summaries of the epidemiology and clinical
                            features of early cases at the Hanoi-French Hospital indicate
                            that the outbreak is not due to human influenza or avian
                            influenza H5N1, but is a new disease most likely caused by a
                            new respiratory virus. The Vice-Minister of Health agrees to invite
                            a larger WHO team and acts immediately on WHO’s
                            recommendations to control the outbreak. Meanwhile, the
                            Hanoi-French Hospital discharges all other patients and limits
                            new admissions to staff members suspected of having the
                            infection. Now, 26 staff members are ill, five in critical condition.

            Hong Kong       A preliminary investigation of the Prince of Wales outbreak by
                            the Department of Health suggests that the disease has an
                            incubation period of one to seven days and is spread through
                            droplets and fomites (materials contaminated with body
                            secretions). Practitioners as well as the general public are issued
                            reminders about infection controls and preventive measures
                            against respiratory tract infections.

            13 MARCH
            China           The Health Minister agrees to a WHO mission to help find the
                            cause of the Guangdong outbreak. Separately, the Ministry of
                            Health writes to WHO requesting training for laboratory staff in
                            the use of the micro-neutralization test for H5N1.

            Viet Nam        The Ministry of Health forms an interdepartmental task force
                            chaired by the Vice-Minister of Heath to address the outbreak.

            Singapore       The Ministry of Health reports that the three cases of atypical
                            pneumonia all stayed at the Metropole Hotel in Hong Kong.
                            One checked in on 20 February; the other two on 21 February.

            Canada          Mr TCK dies and other members of his family are now ill [see 7
                            March]. Health Canada is notified. A patient who was in the
                            emergency department with Mr TCK on 7 March returns to the
                            Scarborough Hospital after suffering a heart attack. By then, his
                            contact with Mr TCK is known, but his illness is not thought to
                            be compatible with atypical pneumonia. Health-care workers



     SARS: How a global
14   epidemic was stopped
            use only standard infection-control procedures while treating
            the patient. He is transferred to York Central Hospital, north of
            Toronto, and passes on the virus to more than 50 people.9

14 MARCH
Canada      Toronto outbreak is reported
            The Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care announces
            at a press conference that four members of a family in Toronto
            have atypical pneumonia, and two have died. The cases draw
            intense media interest.

Viet Nam    The WHO team, mobilized through GOARN, starts arriving.

Taiwan      First Taiwan case is reported
            The wife of a 54-year-old man who was in Guangdong in late
            February and who was hospitalized on 8 March, is also admitted
            with respiratory symptoms [see Chapter 8]. The two cases are
            reported. The man passes on the virus to one other family
            member; only one hospital worker is infected. Over the next
            five weeks up to 21 April, only one more local transmission is
            identified, even though there will have been 24 confirmed SARS
            cases by then.
15 MARCH
Singapore   In Frankfurt, German authorities await the arrival of flight SQ25,
            which stops in transit from New York to Singapore; full
            protection against infection is ready. As soon as the plane lands
            they quarantine it and remove a 32-year-old physician who
            treated the two cases in Singapore’s Tan Tock Seng Hospital at
            the start of the month, and developed symptoms while attending
            a medical conference in New York. Before he boards the plane
            home, he phones a colleague in Singapore saying that he is
            unwell and returning to Singapore. The colleague advises the
            Singapore authorities, who in turn advise the German authorities
            through WHO. As they thought, the physician has SARS. All the
            passengers and crew are followed up for signs of infection. The
            physician passes on the virus to his wife and mother-in-law,
            who were travelling with him, and to one crewmember. All
            recover. None of the other passengers or the participants at the
            medical conference develops infection.




                                                                  SARS: How a global
                                                                 epidemic was stopped   15
            WHO                         WHO issues emergency travel advisory and names the fatal
                                        illness
                                        Prompted by the SQ25 event, WHO issues a rare travel advisory
                                        as evidence mounts that the virus is spreading by air travel along
                                        international routes. WHO names the mysterious illness after its
                                        symptoms—severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)—and
                                        declares it “a worldwide health threat”. WHO issues the first
                                        case definitions of suspect and probable cases of SARS,* and
                                        calls on all travellers and airlines to be aware of the signs and
                                        symptoms. [See Appendix 2 for the full text of the press release.]

            China                       Widespread transmission occurs on flight CA112
                                        Flight CA112 leaves Hong Kong for Beijing. On the flight is 72-
                                        year-old Mr LSK, who is already very sick from SARS. He was
                                        infected while visiting his brother in ward 8A of Prince of Wales
                                        Hospital, where a 26-year-old pneumonia patient was being
                                        treated [see 4 March]. At least 22 of the 119 passengers and two
                                        of the eight crewmembers on that flight will develop SARS—the
                                        only event with widespread in-flight SARS transmission [see
                                        Chapter 15].10 Mr LSK is also the second index case for Beijing,
                                        where at least 59 of his contacts develop SARS.7

            Singapore                   The Ministry of Health forms a task force to deal with the
                                        outbreak.

            16 MARCH
            WHO                         WHO releases list of “affected areas”
                                        WHO releases a list of areas where the health authority has
                                        reported local transmission of SARS. These are: Guangdong,
                                        Hanoi, Hong Kong, Singapore, Toronto, and Vancouver. [See
                                        Appendix 3 for WHO’s list of areas that experienced local
                                        transmission of SARS from 16 November 2002 to 5 July 2003.]

            WHO                         WHO receives reports of over 150 suspect and probable cases
                                        of SARS. Most were in very close contact with other cases. More
                                        than 90% are health-care workers.




           * The WHO case definition is based on fever and respiratory symptoms with “suspect” and “probable” case definitions [see Annex 2 for case
             definition]. There is no confirmed category, as no laboratory test is available as yet. The case definition is very broad and focuses on exposure
             to areas with known transmission, making it more challenging for these areas.



     SARS: How a global
16   epidemic was stopped
Philippines   Media reports, based on WHO information, wrongly include the
              Philippines on the list of affected areas. A suspect case—Mr JC’s
              business associate who travelled with him to Hanoi—returned
              to the Philippines on 11 March and was isolated on 15 March.
              The associate did not have pneumonia and did not meet WHO
              case definitions.

China         WHO shares laboratory information from Hong Kong and Hanoi
              with the Ministry of Health, and encourages the Ministry to do
              the same.

Viet Nam      Active contact tracing of close contacts starts.

Canada        Mr P, who was exposed to Mr TCK in the emergency department
              of Scarborough Hospital, Grace division [see 7 March], returns
              to the hospital with respiratory symptoms and a fever. Mr P is
              isolated and then transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU).
              His wife, who accompanies him to the hospital, is not asked
              about her symptoms until he is in ICU. By then, she has passed
              on the virus to seven visitors to the emergency department, seven
              hospital staff, two patients, two paramedics, and a fire fighter.9

17 MARCH
WHO           WHO says travel restrictions are not justified
              WHO urges national health authorities to be vigilant, but does
              not advise restrictions in travel or trade.

WHO           WHO sets up a laboratory network (11 laboratories in nine
              countries) to share scientific information by telephone and on
              secure websites to identify the cause of the virus. Similar networks
              will be formed on 20 March to address clinical aspects (78
              clinicians in nine countries) and on 28 March to deal with
              epidemiology (nine sites in nine countries).

WHO           The WHO Western Pacific Regional Office outbreak team
              organizes itself into the SARS Outbreak and Preparedness
              Response Team with a SARS Response Group for affected areas
              and a SARS Preparedness Group for countries not yet affected.
              There are several daily teleconferences between the Regional
              Office and the outbreak sites, as well as with WHO Headquarters
              [see Chapter 3].



                                                                      SARS: How a global
                                                                     epidemic was stopped   17
           WHO              The Regional Office also creates logistics bases and supply chains
                            to ensure that protective equipment and medicines are available
                            when needed.

           China            The Ministry of Health submits a brief first report on the
                            Guangdong outbreak to WHO. The outbreak is said to have
                            tapered off. The first SARS press briefing is held at the WHO
                            country office.

           Singapore        SARS is made a notifiable disease under the Infectious Disease
                            Act.

           18 MARCH
           WHO              WHO adds Taiwan, China, to its list of affected areas. WHO
                            repeats its previous statement that no travel restrictions are
                            necessary, as most cases of infection occurred in close contact
                            with known cases.

           Hong Kong        Because of staff shortages resulting from the high number of
                            staff reporting ill, the Prince of Wales Hospital decides to suspend
                            accident and emergency services from 19 to 21 March, pending
                            a review. The department will eventually reopen on 30 March.

           Canada           Health Canada issues a health advisory and screens patients
                            arriving from Hong Kong.

           19 MARCH
           WHO              WHO removes Vancouver from its list of affected areas because
                            there was no local transmission from the imported case.

           WHO              WHO announces that research teams in Germany and Hong
                            Kong have found particles of a paramyxovirus in SARS patients.
                            Awareness of the disease is now very high throughout the world.

           Hong Kong        Link to the Metropole Hotel is identified
                            The Department of Health learns that seven cases can be traced
                            to the 9th floor of the Metropole Hotel. Professor LJL is identified
                            as the index case [see 21 February]. Meanwhile, Professor
                            Sydney Chung, Dean of the Faculty of Medicine at The Chinese
                            University of Hong Kong, writes to the Director of Health, asking




     SARS: How a global
18   epidemic was stopped
           her to “urgently consider all possible measures including
           quarantine of patients and contact to contain the outbreak before
           it is too late”.11

China      WHO receives a letter from the Ministry of Health that Chlamydia
           was found by electron microscopy in five SARS patients.

Taiwan     Officials report three “probable” SARS cases and seek inclusion
           in GOARN and support and advice from WHO

Viet Nam   The Ministry of Health disseminates guidance on SARS
           surveillance and control to all district Preventive Medicine
           Teams, provincial Preventive Medicine Centres, clinical services,
           and port health authorities.

20 MARCH
WHO        The WHO laboratory network works
           on clinical specimens to identify the
           pathogen; the research is focused on
           the paramyxovirus. Meanwhile, the
           Singapore laboratory identifies, under
           electron microscopy, coronavirus-like
           particles in the respiratory samples of
           the three Singapore patients.
                                                     Coronavirus-like particles revealed in
WHO        WHO       organizes    two     daily the respiratory samples of patients      in
                                                Singapore.
           teleconferences to share first-hand
           experience in the management of SARS cases among clinicians
           in Asia, Europe, and North America.

Taiwan     The Department of Health protests the inclusion of Taiwan,
           China on the WHO list of affected areas.

Viet Nam   A 24-hour SARS reporting hot line is established.

21 MARCH
WHO        WHO updates clinical picture of SARS cases
           WHO provides a more complete clinical picture of SARS, pooled
           from the findings of clinicians treating SARS patients in seven
           countries. 12 WHO also posts an advisory to guide the safe




                                                                    SARS: How a global
                                                                   epidemic was stopped       19
                                         discharge and follow-up of convalescent cases, and updates this
                                         on 28 March.13

            China                        There is increasing pressure from the media and embassies for
                                         more information. The WHO country office holds its second
                                         press briefing.

            Singapore                    The first WHO liaison officer arrives.

            22 MARCH
            China                        In Hong Kong, WHO’s Regional Director for the Western Pacific
                                         meets with the Health Minister of China to ask for more
                                         information on Guangdong Province, as well as clearance for a
                                         WHO team to visit the province.

            Hong Kong                    Amoy Gardens index case is hospitalized
                                         Mr LTC, a 33-year-old with autoimmune kidney disease, arrives
                                         at Prince of Wales Hospital for scheduled dialysis; his condition
                                         worsens and he is admitted. Although Mr LTC lives and works
                                         in Guangdong, he visits Hong Kong twice a week for treatment.
                                         Each time he stays with his brother who lives in Block E of the
                                         Amoy Gardens housing complex. On 15 March, after spending
                                         the night with his brother, Mr LTC was treated in ward 8A of
                                         Prince of Wales Hospital for fever and diarrhoea. He will be
                                         diagnosed with SARS on 27 March.

            Hong Kong                    Coronavirus is identified as possible cause of SARS
                                         The Hong Kong University announces that a coronavirus has
                                         been identified as the agent responsible for SARS and that a
                                         diagnostic test has been developed to detect antibodies in
                                         infected patients. Using electron microscopy, CDC in the United
                                         States of America also identifies an isolate from a SARS patient
                                         as coronavirus, and sends over sequences of the virus the next
                                         day for posting on the WHO website.*




            * Over the next few weeks, other laboratories will support this finding. The virus will be found to be an entirely new, or until now undetected, member
               of the coronavirus family, and will be named SARS-CoV. It will be proven to be the cause of SARS [see 16 April].



     SARS: How a global
20   epidemic was stopped
               Figure 1.2 Schematic drawing of SARS coronavirus




            Source: Drazen JM 14




Singapore       Tan Tock Seng Hospital is designated as the only hospital to
                observe and isolate suspect cases and treat all cases.

23 MARCH
China           International experts arrive in Beijing and form a second WHO
                team with WHO China staff. The team will start work in Beijing
                and seek permission to travel to Guangdong.

Hong Kong       Students are asked to stay home for one week if they have
                relatives or contacts suffering from “atypical pneumonia”. About
                180 students will be affected. The Chief Executive of the Hospital
                Authority—a statutory and independent body that provides all
                public hospital services in Hong Kong—is hospitalized with
                SARS.

Canada          Toronto hospital closes
                The Scarborough Hospital, Grace division, in Toronto is closed
                to new patients and visitors. Employees are stopped from working
                in other hospitals. Anyone who was in the hospital after 16 March
                is asked to go on 10-day home quarantine. Health Canada reports
                11 cases of SARS in Canada: 10 in Toronto and one in Vancouver
                [see 7 March].9

24 MARCH
WHO             WHO maintains that no travel restrictions to any destination
                are needed, and notes that there is no evidence to date of
                widespread SARS transmission during air travel.

                                                                      SARS: How a global
                                                                     epidemic was stopped   21
            Hong Kong       Secretary for Health, Welfare and Food Dr Yeoh Eng-kiong,
                            referring to doctors using a regime of ribavirin and steroids,
                            says the results are encouraging, with 85% of patients on the
                            regime showing improvement. Meanwhile, members of the
                            public are urged to avoid visiting public hospitals unless
                            necessary.

            Singapore       Health officials quarantine hundreds of people who may have
                            been exposed to SARS
                            The Ministry of Health requires contacts of SARS cases to be
                            quarantined at home for 10 days. More than 300 contacts have
                            to be traced. The Ministry also bans hospital visits to SARS
                            patients. Meanwhile, epidemiological tracking shows that only
                            one of the first three cases led to other infections. This one case
                            led to 22 other infections.

            25 MARCH
            Hong Kong       Cases infected on flight CA112 start to be identified
                            Nine SARS cases are found to have been on flight CA112. The
                            Department of Health seeks to trace all passengers on this flight
                            and reminds people who have respiratory symptoms to avoid
                            travelling by plane. In total, 24 people were infected on the
                            flight [see 15 March and Chapter 15].

            Canada          The Ontario government designates SARS as a reportable,
                            virulent, communicable disease under its Health Protection and
                            Promotion Act. Health Canada recommends deferring travel to
                            Hanoi, Hong Kong, Guangdong Province in China, and
                            Singapore.

            26 MARCH
            WHO             The WHO Clinical Network holds virtual “grand rounds” with
                            80 clinicians from 13 countries. The discussion focuses on
                            presenting features, progression, treatment, prognostic indicators,
                            and discharge criteria. The consensus findings, including the
                            conclusion that no therapy has been proven to be effective, are
                            disseminated.

            China           The WHO team concludes that the Guangdong outbreak of
                            “atypical pneumonia” was most likely SARS, and the origin of
                            the multicountry outbreak.



     SARS: How a global
22   epidemic was stopped
Hong Kong   First patients from Amoy Gardens outbreak present
            The Department of Health is notified that 15 residents of the
            Amoy Gardens apartments have been admitted to Union Church
            Hospital with suspected SARS, and immediately initiates an
            investigation [see Chapter 16].

Singapore   The Government orders the closure of all primary schools,
            secondary schools, junior colleges, and centralized institutes
            from 27 March to 6 April 2003. This is to allay public concern,
            although the risk of contracting SARS is limited to close contacts
            of cases showing symptoms.

Canada      The Premier of Ontario declares a province-wide SARS
            emergency. All hospitals in the Greater Toronto Area are placed
            on “Code Orange” and required to suspend nonessential services.
            Hospitals are also instructed to create isolation units, provide
            exposed staff members with protective clothing, and limit
            visitors. Hospital access will be further limited on 30 March.9

27 MARCH
WHO         WHO issues new travel advice:
            recommends exit screening
            WHO issues more stringent advice to
            international travellers and airlines,
            and recommends that passengers from
            affected areas be interviewed for SARS
            symptoms or history of contact.
                                                       A passenger has his temperature taken
WHO         WHO adds Beijing and Shanxi                prior to checking in for a flight at
                                                       Hong Kong airport.
            Province, China, to its list of affected
            areas.

China       The Ministry of Health reports 792 cases (a third of them health
            workers) and 31 deaths from “atypical pneumonia” from 16
            November 2002 to 28 February 2003 (it previously reported
            305 cases and five deaths up to 9 February [see 11 February]).

Hong Kong   The Director of Health makes SARS a statutorily notifiable disease
            by revising the Quarantine and Prevention of Disease Ordinance.
            The amended ordinance provides the legal basis for mandating
            close contacts of SARS patients to report daily to one of four
            designated medical centres (to start operating from 31 March)


                                                                     SARS: How a global
                                                                    epidemic was stopped       23
                            for up to 10 days. Later, the ordinance will also be used to
                            enable home quarantine of contacts. Meanwhile, the
                            Government announces that all secondary and primary schools
                            and preschools will be suspended for nine days, starting
                            29 March. The Rolling Stones cancel their Hong Kong concert.

            28 MARCH
            China           The Ministry of Health agrees with the WHO team that the
                            Guangdong outbreak was a SARS outbreak [see 26 March]. The
                            WHO team emphasizes the need to visit Guangdong [see
                            23 March], but no agreement on the matter is reached. WHO
                            China issues the statement: “This week, China has become, very
                            clearly, part of the global network in dealing with the disease.”15
                            The Ministry of Health will provide WHO with regular, up-to-
                            date reports from all provinces from 1 April.

            Singapore       The fourth imported SARS case, who was infected on flight
                            CA112 [see 15 March and Chapter 15], is reported.

            Taiwan          There are six new cases, four of whom travelled on flight CA112.
                            The Department of Health classifies SARS as a statutory
                            communicable disease and requires visitors to fill out a health
                            declaration form. Civil servants are banned from visiting China,
                            Hong Kong, and Viet Nam.16

            29 MARCH
            WHO             Dr Carlo Urbani dies of SARS in
                            Thailand. Special tributes for his work
                            in general, and especially his early
                            alert about SARS, start to come in [see
                            Chapter 18].

            Hong Kong       All incoming passengers must fill out
                            health declaration forms as part of the
                            new screening procedures for SARS.      Dr Carlo Urbani

                            Departing passengers are required to answer questions relating
                            to SARS.

            Australia       The Government warns citizens against travelling to Hong Kong,
                            Singapore, China, and Viet Nam.

            USA             The Government extends its travel advisories to China, Hanoi,
                            Singapore, and Hong Kong.
     SARS: How a global
24   epidemic was stopped
30 MARCH
Hong Kong    Among the residents of Amoy Gardens, 190 are now hospitalized
             with suspected SARS.

Canada       York Central Hospital is closed to new patients; employees are
             asked to quarantine themselves. Thousands of other Toronto
             residents face quarantine at home.

31 MARCH
Hong Kong    Amoy Gardens residents are quarantined
             The Director of Health issues an exceptional order to isolate all
             the residents of Block E for 10 days [see Chapters 7 and 16]. Of
             the 213 residents of Amoy Gardens that are hospitalized with
             suspected SARS, 107 come from Block E.

Singapore    Mr TSC, a 64-year-old vegetable seller, is infected when he visits
             his brother, Mr TKC, at the Singapore General hospital. Mr TSC
             will become the index case for a community and hospital
             outbreak [see Chapter 17]. Mr TKC is the index case of a hospital
             outbreak that will be recognized on 4 April.

Singapore    Nurses at Changi Airport begin visual screening of inbound
             passengers from affected areas.

1 APRIL
China        China starts daily reporting
             Health authorities begin daily reporting of probable SARS cases
             and deaths nationwide, and by province.

Hong Kong    Amoy Gardens residents are evacuated
             As cases continue to increase and preliminary evidence suggests
             an environmental source, the Government evacuates all the
             quarantined residents of Block E of Amoy Gardens to two holiday
             camps to complete their 10-day quarantine. The block is then
             intensively investigated and disinfected.

2 APRIL
Hong Kong,   WHO issues travel advisory for Hong Kong and Guangdong
China        In response to the continuous export of virus from Hong Kong
             (in nine people since the global alert) and the community spread




                                                                   SARS: How a global
                                                                  epidemic was stopped   25
                                 at Amoy Gardens, WHO issues its most stringent travel advisory
                                 in its 55-year history: consider postponing all but essential travel
                                 to Hong Kong and Guangdong [see Table 1.1].

            China                The Ministry of Health allows the WHO team to travel to
                                 Guangdong [see 23 March and 28 March]. The team visits
                                 Guangdong from 3 to 8 April. There is intense media interest in
                                 the visit; an information officer joins the team in Guangdong to
                                 help with media queries and interviews.

            Singapore            Ngee Ann Polytechnic College is closed for three days following
                                 the discovery of a suspected SARS case among its students.

            USA                  The Government authorizes its nonessential diplomats and
                                 families to leave China and Hong Kong.


              Table 1.1 Chronology of World Health Organization travel advisory notices
                 2 April    Travel advisory issued for Hong Kong and Guangdong, China
               23 April     Travel advisory issued for Beijing and Shanxi, China and for Toronto, Canada
               29 April     Travel advisory lifted for Toronto
                 8 May      Travel advisory issued for Tianjin, Inner Mongolia, and Taipei, China
               17 May       Travel advisory issued for Hubei, China
               21 May       Travel advisory extended to all of Taiwan, China
               23 May       Travel advisory lifted for Hong Kong and Guangdong
               13 June      Travel advisory lifted for Hubei, Inner Mongolia, Shanxi, and Tianjin
               17 June      Travel advisory lifted for Taiwan
               24 June      Travel advisory lifted for Beijing

            Source: Update 92: Chronology of travel recommendations, areas with local transmission. Geneva, World
            Health Organization, 2003 (http://www.who.int/csr/don/2003_07_01/en/index.html).


            3 APRIL
            Viet Nam             New cluster of cases starts
                                 Just as the local outbreak appears to be over, a new case (linked
                                 to the Hanoi-French Hospital) is found in another hospital in
                                 Ninh Binh Province. This case will transmit the virus to six others
                                 (including a physician), but there will be no further transmission
                                 of SARS in the country.

            China                The Minister of Health addresses SARS-related issues on national
                                 television.




     SARS: How a global
26   epidemic was stopped
Hong Kong   The Government announces that school suspensions, which began
            on 29 March, will be extended to 21 April. In public hospitals, a
            no-visiting policy is implemented in all acute wards and a restricted-
            visiting policy is enforced in convalescent and psychiatric wards.

Thailand    Officials announce that entire planeloads of visitors from high-
            risk countries will be quarantined for 14 days if anyone aboard
            is found with symptoms of SARS.

4 APRIL
Singapore   Outbreak occurs at Singapore General Hospital
            Thirteen staff from two wards of Singapore General Hospital
            are discovered to have developed fever. Over the next two days,
            all the patients and staff are transferred to Tan Tock Seng
            Hospital. The index case, Mr TKC, did not have typical symptoms.
            He presented with bleeding from the gut [see 31 March], and is
            confirmed to have SARS only on 9 April, but has been isolated
            since 2 April. By then, 24 health-care workers, 15 patients, and
            12 family members and visitors have been infected.17

USA         President George W. Bush orders SARS added to the list of
            communicable diseases. Anyone suspected of having SARS can
            be quarantined.

5 APRIL
China       ILO official, infected on flight to Beijing, dies
            A 53-year-old Finnish staff member of the International Labour
            Organisation (ILO) dies of SARS in Beijing. On flight TG614
            from Bangkok to Beijing on 23 March, he sat next to a
            symptomatic Chinese official who had been infected on
            15 March on flight CA112 and had discharged himself from a
            hospital in Bangkok [see Chapter 15].

7 APRIL
WHO         WHO reports that three types of tests for SARS are now available,
            but each one has important limitations. The enzyme linked
            immunosorbent assay (ELISA) detects antibodies but is reliably
            positive only 20 days after the onset of symptoms, so its results
            cannot be used to isolate and treat a patient, and to initiate




                                                                      SARS: How a global
                                                                     epidemic was stopped   27
                            public-health action. An immunofluorescence (IFA) assay detects
                            antibodies reliably by the tenth day of infection, but is a
                            demanding and comparatively slow test requiring the growth of
                            the virus in cell culture. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
                            test (detecting SARS virus genetic material) is more useful in the
                            early stages of infection, but produces many false-negatives.

            China           WHO team members and Guangdong Health Bureau officials
                            brief the international consulates in Guangzhou on the team’s
                            findings. The international representatives are advised that SARS
                            cases were still occurring, but a good surveillance system and
                            isolation and infection control has been established and the
                            outbreak is being contained, with fewer infections.

            Taiwan          A Cabinet spokesperson says the foreign-worker policy towards
                            Thailand might be reconsidered in retaliation for a Thai demand
                            that Taiwanese visitors wear masks at all times while in Thailand.

            8 APRIL
            China           A military doctor sends a letter to journalists accusing the
                            Government of concealing the number of SARS cases and deaths
                            in Beijing. Underreporting by Beijing military hospitals fuels
                            concerns that China is not reporting the real situation.

            9 APRIL
            China           The WHO team that visited Guangdong (3–8 April) meets with
                            senior officials, including Vice-Premier Wu Yi. They state that
                            Guangdong Province has responded well to the outbreak but
                            that other provinces do not have the same capacity for response.
                            The team expresses concern about reporting, contract tracing,
                            and isolation practices in Beijing [see Chapter 6].

            Singapore       The Roman Catholic Church suspends the hearing of confessions.

            10 APRIL
            Hong Kong       Officials announce that, effective immediately, all household
                            contacts of SARS patients will be quarantined at home, with no
                            visitors, for up to 10 days. To start with, around 150 persons in
                            70 to 80 households are subject to the new requirement.
                            Residents of Block E, Amoy Gardens, who were moved to holiday
                            camps on 1 April, return to their homes.



     SARS: How a global
28   epidemic was stopped
Singapore                   A commercial security firm is hired
                            by the Government to serve Home
                            Quarantine Orders and to install
                            “electronic picture cameras” in homes
                            to ensure compliance.

Taiwan                      The international airport begins
                            checking the temperature of every                                        Residents of Amoy Gardens return from
                            arriving passenger.                                                      quarantine on 10 April, after spending 10
                                                                                                     days in an isolated holiday camp.

11 APRIL
Hong Kong                   Officials announce that, from 14 April, close contacts of SARS
                            patients will be barred from leaving Hong Kong during the
                            quarantine period.

Singapore                   The Ministry of Manpower imposes a 10-day quarantine on
                            holders of Work Permits and Employment Passes who enter
                            Singapore from SARS-affected countries.

South Africa                The first probable SARS case is reported. Cases in 19 countries
                            on four continents have now been reported.

12 APRIL
WHO                         WHO adds unspecified areas of the United States of America
                            and London (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
                            Ireland) to its list of affected areas, noting that transmission has
                            been limited.*

China                       Premier Wen Jiabao concedes that the SARS outbreak in China
                            is “grave” and pledges that the Government will “speak the truth”
                            in disclosing information about the outbreak.

Mongolia                    Mongolia reports its first cases
                            Five persons infected in Inner Mongolia, China, are isolated in an
                            infectious disease hospital in Ulaanbaatar on 12 and 13 April. A




* WHO will later announce that both countries have not had any local transmission. The case associated with local transmission in the United
  Kingdom will be discarded on 12 May 2003, as the clinical picture and laboratory findings are consistent with influenza. In the United States
  of America, the infection in one of two reported secondary cases more likely happened during travel, and the other case was later discarded.
  Very little information was made available about the details of the situation in the USA during the outbreak.



                                                                                                                           SARS: How a global
                                                                                                                          epidemic was stopped    29
                            relative who did not travel to Inner Mongolia will develop
                            symptoms on 15 April and be admitted to hospital on 19 April—
                            the only case of local transmission in Mongolia [see Chapter 11].

            13 APRIL
            Philippines     Index case of the Philippines outbreak is isolated
                            Ms AC, a 46-year-old nursing attendant working in Canada, is
                            isolated in San Lazaro Hospital in Manila. She will die early the
                            next day. Ms AC arrived in the Philippines on 4 April, having
                            been infected just before leaving Toronto. There will be eight
                            other infections in the chain of transmission from Ms AC, all
                            among family and hospital contacts. Extensive contact tracing
                            does not identify any other cases [see Chapter 10].

            14 APRIL
            Canada, USA     SARS virus genome is sequenced
                            Laboratories in Canada and the United States of America
                            announce that they have fully sequenced the SARS virus genome.
                            The sequences are practically identical.

            China           President Hu Jintao says on state television that he is “very
                            worried” about SARS.18

            15 APRIL
            China           The WHO team in Beijing meets with the Mayor and Vice-Mayor.
                            The team is allowed to visit two military hospitals, on the
                            understanding that the findings will not be released to the public.
                            Until the visits were granted, rumours about cases were rife but
                            there was no way to verify them.

            Singapore       SARS patients discharged from hospital are to be placed on 14-
                            day home quarantine as an added precaution.

            16 APRIL
            WHO             A new form of a coronavirus never before seen in humans is
                            confirmed as the cause of SARS
                            WHO announces that, thanks to extraordinary global
                            collaboration, a new coronavirus is confirmed to be the cause
                            of SARS, with Koch’s postulates fulfilled. An initial suggestion is
                            to name it the “Urbani virus”, in recognition of Dr Urbani’s
                            contribution to its control. It is finally named SARS coronavirus
                            (SARS-CoV).

     SARS: How a global
30   epidemic was stopped
China         A WHO team in Beijing Municipality attends a tumultuous and
              crowded media briefing from 11 to 15 March. The media are
              frustrated by the lack of information from the Government amid
              fears of a large outbreak in Beijing. Asked to estimate the number
              of cases, the team responds that “given the inadequate
              surveillance system, and the hospital practice of maintaining
              cases as ‘under investigation’ when they actually met the case
              definition for ‘probable cases’, there could be 100–200 probable
              cases (or 3–6 times more than … reported). In addition to about
              a thousand cases still ‘under investigation’.” The team also
              uncovers serious lapses in hospital management and infection
              control. These concerns were shared earlier with the Ministry
              of Health.

17 APRIL
Hong Kong     The Department of Health announces the findings of an
              investigation into the Amoy Gardens outbreak. The report
              attributes the environmental transmission to an unusual
              combination of events affecting the sewage system [see Chapter
              16]. Passengers departing from the international airport start to
              undergo temperature screening. Later in April and May,
              screening will be extended to transit and arriving passengers as
              well as to travellers at land and sea border control points.

18 APRIL
China         Leaders warn local officials against covering up reports on the
              spread of SARS. The WHO team in Beijing expresses strong
              concern over inadequate reporting of SARS cases in military
              hospitals as rumours of undisclosed cases mount.

Singapore     All public hospitals allow only one visitor per patient per day.

United Kingdom Officials report that they have placed on 10-day quarantine
               about 150 boarding-school pupils returning from Asia.

19 APRIL
Viet Nam      Officials mark the first week with no new probable case of SARS.
              The 1,130-kilometre border with China, officials say, may be
              closed to prevent the risk of importation.

Canada        Toronto authorities investigate a cluster of 31 suspected and
              probable SARS cases among members of a charismatic religious


                                                                    SARS: How a global
                                                                   epidemic was stopped   31
                            group, related to two large gatherings of the group on 28 and
                            29 March.

            WHO             WHO adds Inner Mongolia to its list of affected areas.

            20 APRIL
            China           Chinese officials are fired for downplaying SARS
                            Health Minister Zhang Wenkang and Beijing Mayor Meng
                            Xuenong, both of whom were seen to have responded
                            inadequately to the SARS crises, are removed from their posts.
                            This marks a turning point in control efforts in China. Beijing
                            starts more accurate daily reporting of cases, and reports 295
                            previously unreported cases (for a cumulative total of 339). By
                            early May, Beijing will have reported more than 2,000 cases,
                            and 100 new ones will be reported daily.

            Singapore       Officials close a large wholesale fruit and vegetable market after
                            detecting a cluster of three cases linked to a 64-year-old vegetable
                            seller [see 31 March and Chapter 17].

            22 APRIL
            Taiwan          Taiwan outbreak starts
                            A cluster of six cases is reported from Hoping Hospital, Taipei.
                            This is the start of a major outbreak in Taiwan [see Chapter 8].

            China           A WHO expert arrives to help develop measures to prevent the
                            spread of SARS through travel during the May Day holidays.
                            SARS has spread to some of the poorest provinces and regions,
                            including western Guangxi, northern Gansu, and Inner
                            Mongolia.

            Hong Kong       Senior secondary schools resume classes, with students required
                            to wear masks and undergo daily temperature checks. Junior
                            secondary schools will resume classes on April 28. Primary
                            schools and other special schools will open on 19 May.

            Singapore       Doctors and nurses in private hospitals, working for private
                            agencies, or self-employed are ordered to work in only one
                            hospital. Patients can no longer be transferred between hospitals.




     SARS: How a global
32   epidemic was stopped
23 APRIL
Canada,     WHO extends its travel advisory to Toronto, Beijing, and Shanxi
China       Province.

China       Beijing officials suspend all primary and secondary schools for
            two weeks.

Singapore   Authorities install thermal imaging scanners to check for fever
            at Changi Airport and at the two main border entry points with
            Malaysia—Woodlands and Tuas.

24 APRIL
China       Health officials seal off the People’s Hospital of Beijing University
            (directly across the street from the Ministry of Health building)
            and the People’s Armed Police General Hospital, and put
            thousands of patients and medical workers under observation.

Hong Kong   The Department of Health announces that a WHO team from
            Health Canada will assist in its investigation of the environmental
            transmission of SARS at Amoy Gardens and other sites, including
            the Metropole Hotel. There is considerable public and media
            interest in the team, which will report on 16 May. Also, inbound
            passengers start to have their temperature screened in addition
            to filling out health declaration forms [see 29 March].

Canada      Canada objects to WHO advisory against travel to Toronto
            Canada writes a letter to WHO, objecting strongly to its inclusion
            in the travel advisory. The letter says: “There is no evidence of
            any casual transmission of SARS in Toronto and every case of
            SARS can be linked back to the original Canadian case.”19 Health
            Canada states: “Travel to any destination in Canada is safe.”

Taiwan      Hoping Hospital is quarantined as the number of new cases
            continues to rise [see 22 April]. The number of potentially exposed
            persons is estimated at 10,000 patients and visitors, and 930 staff
            members. Home quarantine is also ordered for discharged patients
            and visitors who were at the hospital from 9 April.




                                                                     SARS: How a global
                                                                    epidemic was stopped   33
            26 APRIL
            Malaysia        ASEAN + 3 Ministers of Health Special Meeting on SARS is held
                            in Kuala Lumpur. In a joint statement, health ministers urge
                            their heads of government to provide adequate resources to
                            respond effectively to the epidemic.

            China           The WHO team in Shanghai from 21 to 26 April concludes that
                            there is no evidence of systematic underreporting of cases, and
                            that the level of preparedness and response is good. In Beijing,
                            officials order the closure of all the city’s theatres, cinemas,
                            Internet cafés, and other public entertainment places. The new
                            mayor of Beijing discusses WHO support for SARS control in
                            the city with WHO China. A WHO team visits the Center for
                            Disease Control of Beijing and finds inadequate access to SARS
                            data, which are kept by the Beijing Health Bureau.
            28 APRIL
            Viet Nam        WHO removes Viet Nam from its list of affected areas (the last
                            case was isolated on 7 April), making it the first country to contain
                            SARS successfully.

            Singapore       Dozens of food markets are closed for mass cleaning. Thermal
                            scanners are installed at the Singapore Cruise Centre and Tanah
                            Merah Ferry Terminal. Checks with ear thermometers are
                            conducted at Changi Ferry Terminal, Changi Immigration
                            Checkpoint, West Coast Pier, and Clifford Pier. All shipmasters
                            are directed to make a health declaration four hours before
                            arrival.

            29 APRIL
            Thailand        Special ASEAN Leaders Meeting on
                            SARS is held in Bangkok.

            Singapore       All six public hospitals implement a
                            “no visitor” rule.

            Hong Kong       The Government announces that it has
                            chartered an aircraft to Taipei to
                            collect a tour group that was
                            quarantined after one of its members
                            was suspected of having SARS. This         Tony Clement, Ontario’s Minister of Health
                                                                       and Long-Term Care, at a press conference
                            person is later found to not have SARS.    at WHO Headquarters in Geneva on
                                                                       29 April.



     SARS: How a global
34   epidemic was stopped
30 APRIL
WHO         WHO lifts its travel warning against nonessential travel to
            Toronto
            WHO cites local measures to stop the spread of SARS. The
            affected area reported no new cases in the preceding 20 days.

China       Authorities institute travel screening for all modes of transport
            (boat, bus, train, plane). The screening is limited to temperature
            checks at exit points of areas with known transmission. It is later
            assumed that those with fever stopped travelling as a result. No
            recorded exports of SARS virus between provinces are recorded
            after this date.

Singapore   About 200,000 primary students are issued oral digital
            thermometers for their personal use.

1 MAY
WHO         WHO removes the United Kingdom and the United States of
            America from the list of affected areas, but adds Tianjin, China,
            and Ulaanbaatar City, Mongolia.

WHO         WHO updates its case definition for SARS to take into account
            the appropriate use of results from laboratory tests. [See
            Appendix 4 for the updated, and final, SARS case definition.]

China       Shanghai announces strict SARS measures, more stringent than
            those recommended by WHO, including a 14-day quarantine
            period for travellers arriving from affected areas and the setting
            up of traffic checkpoints for health screening.

2 MAY
WHO         In its daily updates, WHO starts using the term “areas with recent
            local transmission” instead of “affected areas”; it begins to classify
            the extent of local transmission in each area as low, medium, or
            high, depending on the extent of spread.

China       While Beijing reporting is complete and timely, WHO team
            members in Beijing call for better data. “The public needs to
            have more information on when and where infection is
            happening,” the team says. “We don’t know that right now.”




                                                                      SARS: How a global
                                                                     epidemic was stopped   35
            Hong Kong       Authorities receive a distress call from a Malaysian cargo ship
                            saying its sailors have SARS-like symptoms. The ship enters Hong
                            Kong waters on 4 May and is allowed to anchor. Ten of its 24
                            crewmembers are rushed to hospital. All of them are later found
                            to be SARS-free.

            Singapore       The Chua Chu Kang, Yishun, Geylang, and Tampines polyclinics
                            set up tents outside their buildings for screening and treating
                            patients with fever.

            Viet Nam        The last SARS case is discharged from the Institute for Clinical
                            Research in Tropical Medicine, Bach Mai Hospital, Hanoi.

            3 MAY
            Taiwan          WHO staff start arriving to join the WHO team composed of
                            CDC staff who have been there since the start of the outbreak.

            4 MAY
            WHO             WHO reports laboratory network data showing that the SARS
                            virus can survive in urine and in faeces at room temperature for
                            at least one to two days.20

            Singapore       A 50-year-old man who disobeyed home quarantine orders
                            becomes the first person to be publicly named and charged
                            under the Infectious Diseases Act.

            5 MAY
            China           About 1,000 villagers surround a local government office in
                            Xiandie in the coastal Zhejiang Province in a violent protest
                            against the quarantine near their homes of suspected SARS
                            patients. The villagers smash and overturn police and government
                            cars, and demand that the patients be moved elsewhere.
                            Meanwhile, a three-member WHO team arrives in Guangdong
                            to review the SARS data of the province and hypothesize on the
                            origins of human infection.

            USA             The University of California at Berkeley announces that it will
                            not accept summer students from those parts of Asia that are
                            affected by the SARS virus.




     SARS: How a global
36   epidemic was stopped
6 MAY
Hong Kong      WHO staff members and Hong Kong officials hold a
               videoconference on the SARS situation. WHO issues the
               following statement: “The number of new cases (in the single
               digits for the last several days) has steadily declined, suggesting
               that the outbreak has peaked.”

Belgium        European health ministers meet in Brussels to standardize anti-
               SARS measures across the continent.

7 MAY
WHO            WHO estimates the case fatality ratio to be less than 1% in persons
               up to 24 years old, 6% in those aged 25 to 44 years, 15% in
               those aged 45 to 64 years, and more than 50% in those who are
               at least 65 years old. WHO confirms its previous assessment
               that the maximum incubation period is 10 days.

Philippines    WHO adds the Philippines to the list of areas with recent local
               transmission, and categorizes the transmission in the country as
               medium because more than one generation of local transmission
               is involved. The WHO Representative clarifies in a press release
               that the risk of infection in the Philippines is negligible because
               there is no community transmission. This helps address the
               negative impact of the country’s inclusion in the list of countries
               affected by SARS.

8 MAY
Philippines,   WHO states that Manila is the only area with local transmission
Taiwan         in the Philippines, and adds Taipei in Taiwan, China, to the list
               of areas with recent local transmission.

China          WHO extends its advisory discouraging all but essential travel
               to other parts of China: Tianjin, Inner Mongolia, and Taipei in
               Taiwan, saying, “The extent of local chains of transmission [and]
               the potential for spread beyond these areas were also major
               factors in the reasoning for this advice.”

China          A joint team from the Ministry of Health and WHO visits Hebei
               Province (8–12 May). Joint teams will also visit the Guangxi
               Autonomous Region (12–16 May), Henan Province (14–18 May),




                                                                      SARS: How a global
                                                                     epidemic was stopped   37
                            Anhui Province (18–22 May), Tianjin City (6–14 June), Shanxi
                            Province (17–25 June), and the Inner Mongolia Autonomous
                            Region (17–25 June).

            9 MAY
            Mongolia        Mongolia is declared “SARS-free”
                            WHO removes Mongolia from its list of countries with recent
                            local transmission (the last and only case of local transmission
                            was isolated on 19 April).

            10 MAY
            Philippines     The Government calls the WHO classification damaging and
                            inaccurate
                            The Government complains in a letter to WHO that the country’s
                            inclusion in the WHO list of areas with recent local transmission
                            gives a misleading impression of the risk in the country, citing
                            the negative effects on its relations with other countries [see
                            Chapter 10]. The small outbreak was brought under control by
                            the end of April, the risk of transmission was significantly limited
                            to close contacts, and all contacts were extensively traced.21
                            WHO says in reply that it considers the outbreak to be “well
                            contained. There appears to be no increased transmission risk
                            in the Philippines. For these reasons, WHO does not recommend
                            any restrictions on travel to the Philippines.”22

            WHO             WHO starts classifying the type of local transmission as “A”,
                            “B”, or “C” and no longer as “low”, “medium”, or “high”, while
                            still retaining the same definitions for the categories [see 2 May
                            and Chapter 10].

            12 MAY
            Singapore       The government-run resort Aloha is converted into alternative
                            accommodation for people who want to spend their quarantine
                            period away from home. The cottages and rooms are offered to
                            those discharged from hospital, those who have been near SARS
                            patients, and tourists issued quarantine orders.

            13 MAY
            WHO             WHO adds Hebei, Hubei, Jilin, Jiangsu, and Shaanxi provinces
                            in China to the list of areas with recent local transmission.




     SARS: How a global
38   epidemic was stopped
WHO         WHO reports that SARS can be contained through case detection,
            patient isolation, and contact tracing.

Singapore   Twenty-four patients and six nurses from the Institute of Mental
            Health are suspected to have SARS (and are treated as SARS
            patients). Their infections are eventually found to be caused by
            the influenza B virus.

14 MAY
Canada      WHO removes Toronto from the list of areas with recent local
            transmission. But some undiagnosed chains of transmission
            continue.

China       The WHO team that visited Hebei (8–12 May) meets with senior
            officials, including Vice-Premier Wu Yi. They report that SARS
            has spread to nine of the province’s 11 prefectures, that 40 of
            the cases in the province have been traced to migrant workers
            returning home from Beijing, and that infection controls in
            Hebei hospitals scrupulously follow the national guidelines.

USA         CDC calls on businesses and universities to continue plans for
            meetings and events that involve people from SARS-affected
            areas, and gives guidance on how to minimize risk.

15 MAY
WHO         WHO issues guidance for mass gatherings with persons from
            affected countries, as well as precautionary recommendations
            to address the theoretical risk that SARS might be transmitted
            through blood products.

16 MAY
Hong Kong   WHO announces findings on environmental transmission at
            Amoy Gardens and the Metropole Hotel
            The WHO team [see 24 April] releases its reports on the Amoy
            Gardens and Metropole Hotel outbreaks. The team confirms
            the findings of the Department of Health that a unique sequence
            of environmental (including the sewage system) and health
            events, which happened simultaneously, contributed to the SARS
            outbreak in Amoy Gardens [see 17 April and Chapter 16]. A
            large viral load outside room 911 of Metropole Hotel may
            explain the transmissions in the hotel [see Chapter 14].



                                                                 SARS: How a global
                                                                epidemic was stopped   39
            Taiwan          The Health Minister resigns over criticism of the authorities’
                            handling of the SARS outbreak. The director of Taiwan’s CDC
                            also offer his resignation.

            17 MAY
            WHO             WHO extends its travel advisory to Hebei Province, China.
                            WHO wraps up the first global consultation on SARS
                            epidemiology in Geneva (16–17 May). More than 40 leading
                            epidemiologists from 16 countries attend the meeting, which
                            confirms that control measures recommended by WHO are
                            supported by available evidence.23

            18 MAY
            China           The Media Centre of the Beijing Joint Working Team for SARS
                            Prevention and Treatment opens. This is the culmination of WHO
                            support to Beijing through a consultant who has been helping
                            the authorities there for the past weeks.

            19 MAY
            WHO             Analysis of in-flight transmissions finds low risk
                            A WHO analysis of 35 flights with a symptomatic SARS case
                            among the passengers or crewmembers finds that only four were
                            associated with the possible transmission of infection to fellow
                            passengers or crewmembers. In only one flight, CA112 from
                            Hong Kong to Beijing, was there widespread transmission [see
                            Chapter 15].

            China           The WHO team that visited Guangxi reports that the area appears
                            to be responding well to its relatively small SARS outbreak.

            20 MAY
            Philippines     The Philippines is declared “SARS-
                            free”
                            WHO removes the Philippines from
                            its list of areas with recent local
                            transmission of SARS. The Health
                            Department’s efficient surveillance
                            and reporting system has helped
                                                                     Philippines Health Secretary Manuel
                            prevent further transmission.
                                                                     Dayrit (right) and World Health
                                                                     Organization Representative Jean-Marc
                                                                     Olivé during a press conference on
                                                                     SARS.



     SARS: How a global
40   epidemic was stopped
21 MAY
Taiwan       WHO includes all of Taiwan (and not just Taipei) in its list of
             areas with local transmission and in its travel advisory.

Singapore    The SARS Channel, a television station devoted exclusively to
             SARS, is launched.

22 MAY
China        Beijing students return to class.

USA          A CDC employee working with a WHO team in Taiwan, China,
             is suspected of having SARS. Testing will later disprove this.

23 MAY
Canada       A second outbreak in Toronto is
             reported
             A cluster of five possible SARS cases
             associated with a single hospital in
             Toronto is reported to WHO. As a
             result, the United States of America
             reinstates a travel alert for Toronto.

Hong Kong,   WHO removes its travel                     A passenger passes a SARS information
China        advisory for Hong Kong and                 board at Pearson International Airport
                                                        in Toronto.
             Guangdong Province, which have
             successfully contained their outbreaks.

Hong Kong,   Research teams announce the results of a joint study of wild
China        animals from a market in southern China that sells such animals
             for food. The study detected several coronaviruses closely related
             genetically to the SARS-CoV in two of the animal species tested
             (masked palm civet and racoon dog). The study also found that
             one other species (Chinese ferret badger) showed antibodies against
             the SARS-CoV. These and other wild animals are traditionally
             considered delicacies and are sold for human consumption in
             markets throughout southern China. The study gives a first indication
             that the SARS virus exists outside a human host.




                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped       41
            24 MAY
            Canada          Health officials identify two clusters of possible SARS cases under
                            investigation: five patients associated with St John’s Rehabilitation
                            Hospital in Toronto, and 26 cases, including 10 health-care
                            workers, associated with North York General Hospital. One
                            patient undergoing investigation is linked to both hospitals.

            26 MAY
            Canada          WHO puts Toronto back on the list of areas with recent local
                            transmission of SARS.

            Canada          Health Canada reports clusters of 26 suspected and eight
                            probable cases of SARS linked to four Toronto hospitals. WHO
                            does not recommend any travel restrictions to Toronto.

            Taiwan          Taipei’s health bureau chief Chiou Shu-ti resigns, making her
                            the third official to step down because of the epidemic.

            27 MAY
            WHO             World Health Assembly passes a
                            resolution on SARS
                            More than 190 countries participating
                            in the World Health Assembly—the
                            governing body of WHO—
                            unanimously approve a resolution on
                            SARS. Delegates also approve a
                            resolution setting out procedures and      In her opening address to the World
                                                                       Health Assembly, WHO Director-General
                            a timetable for revising the               Gro Harlem Brundtland called for greater
                            International Health Regulations to        international cooperation in fighting
                                                                       emerging diseases such as SARS.
                            strengthen WHO’s management of
                            future outbreaks.

            31 MAY
            Singapore       Singapore is declared “SARS-free”
                            WHO removes Singapore from its list of areas with recent local
                            transmission of SARS.

            1 JUNE
            Singapore       The “no visitors” rule at hospitals is lifted, except for suspected
                            and probable SARS cases. Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong
                            launches the OK Campaign for the Community to promote
                            personal hygiene, environmental cleanliness, and public health.


     SARS: How a global
42   epidemic was stopped
4 JUNE
China     WHO is starting to feel that the outbreak can be contained.
          Meanwhile, a WHO training course in the laboratory diagnosis
          of SARS (27 May–4 June) ends.

Germany   A newly reported case, in a man recently returned from Taiwan,
          China, results in the quarantine of around 50 contacts. The man
          is hospitalized in isolation.

USA       CDC removes its travel alert for Singapore and downgrades its
          travel advisory for Hong Kong to a travel alert.

10 JUNE
ASEAN     ASEAN officials declare the region SARS-free
          Health officials from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
          including representatives from China, Japan, and the Republic
          of Korea, declare the region “SARS-free” and urge countries
          that have issued travel advisories to lift them. The ministers also
          praise China for its “strong political commitment” to containing
          SARS.

11 JUNE
China     A WHO team from Headquarters and the Regional Office arrives
          for a three-day visit. The team will confirm that the outbreak is
          nearly under control and that effective public-health measures
          have been implemented.

Canada    Health authorities in Toronto go on high alert, and treat all
          hospital-associated clusters of patients with fever or respiratory
          symptoms as possible SARS cases until proven otherwise. Possible
          cases are immediately isolated. All contacts are being traced
          and, where warranted, quarantined at home. Infection-control
          measures are being followed in all affected facilities. WHO
          officials welcome the precautionary measures and say in a
          statement that they are “deeply concerned by the resurgence of
          SARS cases in Toronto” [see 23 May].

13 JUNE
China     Most of China is declared “SARS-free”
          WHO lifts its travel advisory for Hebei, Inner Mongolia, Shanxi,
          and Tianjin, and drops Guangdong, Hebei, Hubei, Inner
          Mongolia, Jilin, Jiangsu, Shaanxi, Shanxi, and Tianjin from the

                                                                 SARS: How a global
                                                                epidemic was stopped   43
                            list of areas with recent local transmission. Only Beijing and
                            Taiwan, China are still on both lists.

            Canada          WHO upgrades Toronto’s transmission category from “B” to
                            “C” because a person not previously identified as a contact has
                            developed the disease.

            Taiwan          Taipei reports no new potential SARS cases for the first time in
                            two months. Meanwhile, the Department of Health warns people
                            about products that falsely claim to cure SARS. The Department
                            reports that its investigation found such false claims in 193
                            instances, including ads about pineapples, bee propolis, tomato
                            juice, teas, and vegetables.

            17 JUNE
            Taiwan          The WHO Regional Director for the Western Pacific announces
                            that Taiwan, China, is no longer on WHO’s list of areas to which
                            all but essential travel is to be avoided. But WHO continues to
                            discourage travel to Beijing.

            Malaysia        First global conference on SARS
                            opens in Kuala Lumpur
                            The two-day event, convened by
                            WHO, is attended by more than 900
                            scientists and clinicians from 43
                            countries, including specialists who
                            have been at the front line of SARS
                            investigation and response since the      More than 900 delegates attend the WHO
                                                                      Global Conference on SARS in
                            start of the outbreak.                    Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, from 17 to
                                                                      18 June 2003.
            23 JUNE
            Hong Kong       Hong Kong is declared “SARS-free”
                            WHO removes Hong Kong from its list of areas with recent
                            local transmission of SARS.

            24 JUNE
            China           Beijing is declared “SARS-free”
                            The WHO Regional Director for the Western Pacific announces
                            the lifting of WHO’s travel advisory on Beijing, the last area still
                            under a SARS-related travel advisory. WHO also removes the
                            Chinese capital from the list of areas with recent local



     SARS: How a global
44   epidemic was stopped
           transmission. At a press conference,
           the Regional Director says, “Today is
           a milestone in the fight against SARS,
           not only for China but for the world.”

Malaysia   A four-day WHO investigation
           concludes that the country’s five cases
           were infected in other countries.         A group of shop assistants celebrate
           There has been no local transmission.     in Beijing, 24 June 2003, as they watch
                                                     the WHO press conference live on a
           The controls at the border with           large television screen, with the
           Singapore at Johor Baru, which were       announcement of the lifting of the travel
                                                     advisory on Beijing.
           also investigated, are working well.

25 JUNE
China      A 77-year-old woman who fell ill in Guangdong Province is
           reclassified as a probable case. She has been in isolation since
           3 June. This is the first new case reported from Guangdong since
           17 May. As she has been in isolation for over 20 days, there is
           no change in the status of Guangdong.

28 JUNE
Thailand   Health Ministers of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
           (APEC) forum meet in Bangkok to decide on common actions
           to contain the spread of SARS.

2 JULY
Canada     Canada is declared “SARS-free”
           WHO removes Toronto from its list of areas with recent local
           transmission of SARS. The last case was detected and isolated
           on 12 June.

5 JULY
Taiwan     Taiwan, China, is declared “SARS-free”, with no remaining
           chains of transmission
           WHO removes Taiwan, China, from its list of areas with recent
           local transmission of SARS. The last case was detected and
           isolated on 15 June. This means that all known chains of person-
           to-person transmission of the SARS virus have now been broken.




                                                                     SARS: How a global
                                                                    epidemic was stopped         45
            SARS CASES AFTER THE 2002-2003 OUTBREAK

            14 AUGUST 2003
            Canada          Public-health officials report that 143
                            residents and staff of an aged-care
                            facility in British Columbia have
                            developed a respiratory illness. Initial
                            testing suggests SARS. Laboratory
                            analysis will later conclude that the
                            virus responsible for the outbreak is
                            not SARS coronavirus but another
                            human coronavirus known as OC43,           Two experts from WHO collect suspected
                                                                       SARS specimens at a wildlife restaurant
                            which causes the common cold.24            in Guangzhou on 10 January 2004. China
                                                                       reported a suspected SARS case on
                                                                       8 January of a waitress who worked at the
            10 SEPTEMBER 2003                                          restaurant.
            Singapore       Health authorities report that a 27-year-old laboratory worker
                            has developed SARS through accidental contamination in a
                            microbiology laboratory in the National University of Singapore.
                            Rapid identification and isolation prevent other infections.

            17 DECEMBER 2003
            Taiwan          Taipei health authorities report that a research scientist has been
                            infected with SARS. He accidentally touched a culture with his
                            bare hands while working in a high-security laboratory. No one
                            else is infected.

            26 DECEMBER 2003–31 JANUARY 2004
            China           China reports four cases of SARS from Guangdong that do not
                            appear to be epidemiologically linked: a television journalist, a
                            waitress, a man, and a hospital director and practising physician
                            from Guangzhou. Authorities say none of these patients’ contacts
                            or attendant health workers was infected. The virus is not traced
                            conclusively to its source, but may have been of animal origin.
                            However, only the waitress and physician have been exposed
                            to an animal (a palm civet). Two WHO teams visit Guangzhou
                            to investigate the outbreak. As part of the second team, two
                            environmental health experts from Health Canada look for
                            evidence of SARS-CoV in the palm civet cages at the restaurant
                            and other sites.




     SARS: How a global
46   epidemic was stopped
22 APRIL 2004
China           China reports two cases of SARS, with onset in late March and
                mid-April, among researchers at the National Institute of Virology
                in Beijing, where experiments using live and inactivated SARS
                coronavirus have been carried out. The Institute is closed the
                next day. One of the cases leads to the spread of the virus to nine
                other cases over three generations, but by 18 May, three weeks
                later, the outbreak will be declared contained with no further
                cases. Two further cases are identified retrospectively through
                blood tests. An official investigation later recommends major
                changes in procedure at the Institute.


REFERENCES

1
   Xu R-H et al. Epidemiologic clues to SARS origin in China. Emerging Infectious
   Diseases, 2004, 10(6):1030–1037.
2
   Zhong NS et al. Epidemiology and cause of severe acute respiratory syndrome
   (SARS) in Guangdong in February 2003. The Lancet, 25 October 2003,
   362(9393):1353–1358.
3
   Acute respiratory syndrome in China – Update 2. Geneva, World Health
   Organization, 14 February 2003 (http://www.who.int/csr/don/2003_02_14/
   en/, accessed 1 April 2005).
4
   Acute respiratory syndrome, China. Weekly Epidemiological Record, 14
   February 2003, 78 (7):41.
5
   Influenza A(H5N1) in Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China –
   Update. Geneva, World Health Organization, 20 February 2003 (http://
   www.who.int/csr/don/2003_02_20/en/, accessed 1 April 2005).
6
   Enserink M. SARS in China: China’s missed chance. Science, 2003,
   301(5631):294–296.
7
   Liang W et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome, Beijing, 2003. Emerging
   Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10(1):25–31.
8
   Acute respiratory syndrome in Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of
   China/ Viet Nam. Geneva, World Health Organization, 12 March 2003 (http:/
   /www.who.int/csr/don/2003_03_12/en/, accessed 1 April 2005).
9
   National Advisory Committee on SARS and Public Health. Learning from SARS.
   Renewal of public health in Canada. Ottawa, Health Canada, 2003.
10
   Olsen SJ et al. Transmission of the severe acute respiratory syndrome on aircraft.
   New England Journal of Medicine, 18 December 2003, 349(25):2416–2422.
11
   Hong Kong Legislative Council report.




                                                                         SARS: How a global
                                                                        epidemic was stopped   47
            12
               Preliminary clinical description of severe acute respiratory syndrome. Geneva,
               World Health Organization, 2003 (http://www.who.int/csr/sars/clinical/en/,
               accessed 1 April 2005).
            13
               WHO hospital discharge and follow-up policy for patients who have been
               diagnosed with severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). Geneva, World
               Health Organization, 28 March 2003 (http://www.who.int/csr/sars/discharge/
               en/, accessed 1 April 2005).
            14
               Drazen JM. SARS – Looking back over the first 100 days. New England Journal
               of Medicine, 2003, 349:319–320.
            15
               Severe acute respiratory syndrome – Press briefing, Beijing, China. China,
               World Health Organization, 28 March 2003 (http://www.who.int/csr/sars/
               2003_03_28/en/, accessed 1 April 2005).
            16
               Republic of China Government Information Office. DOH mandates increased
               measures against SARS. Taipei Times, 28 March 2003.
            17
               Chow KY et al. Outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome in a tertiary
               hospital in Singapore, linked to a primary patient with atypical presentation:
               epidemiological study. British Medical Journal, 2004, 328:195–198.
            18
               Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) – multicountry outbreak – Update
               30. Geneva, World Health Organization, 15 April 2003 (http://www.who.int/
               csr/don/2003_04_15/, accessed 1 April 2005).
            19
               Broughton J. Health Canada letter to the World Health Organization. Ottawa,
               Population and Public Health Branch, Health Canada, 24 April 2003 (http://
               www.hc-sc.gc.ca/english/protection/warnings/sars/letter.html, accessed 1 April
               2005).
            20
               First data on stability and resistance of SARS coronavirus compiled by members
               of WHO laboratory network. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2003 (http:/
               /www.who.int/csr/sars/survival_2003_05_04/en/index.html, accessed 1 April
               2005).
            21
               World Health Organization. SARS outbreak in the Philippines. Weekly
               Epidemiological Record, 2003, 78:189–192.
            22
               Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) – multicountry outbreak – Update
               52. Geneva, World Health Organization, 10 May 2003 (http://www.who.int/
               csr/don/2003_05_10/en/, accessed 1 April 2005).
            23
               Consensus document on the epidemiology of severe acute respiratory syndrome
               (SARS). Geneva, World Health Organization, 2003 (WHO/CDS/CSR/GAR/
               2003.11).
            24
               Acute Respiratory Disease in British Columbia, Canada. EID Weekly Updates:
               Emerging and Reemerging Infectious Diseases Region of the Americas, 2003,
               1(8).




     SARS: How a global
48   epidemic was stopped
    2 COORDINATING
       THE GLOBAL
        RESPONSE


   When WHO alerted the world to SARS on 12 March 2003, next to nothing
was known about the new disease. It didn’t even have a name. But enough was
known to cause alarm. And learning, as the world did on 15 March, that the
virus appeared to travel on aircraft, did not help.
   In its explosive spread the disease claimed hospital workers in large numbers.
Many others fell critically ill and needed respirators. No treatments worked.
Tests for all known causes of respiratory illness, including influenza, turned up
negative. How the disease came to be and how it developed were unknown;
what seemed inevitable was that there would be further spread.
   Less than four months later, on 5 July, WHO could announce that all known
chains of human-to-human transmission had been broken. An arduous battle
waged in a few countries where the virus had spread had averted the first potential
pandemic (global epidemic) of the 21st century—but only after 8,098 cases,
with 774 deaths, had been reported in 29 countries and areas. This chapter
describes the international mechanisms that contributed to this victory.


NEW MECHANISMS            PUT TO A SEVERE TEST
    The world rose to the challenge of SARS with unprecedented scientific
collaboration and public-health determination. Several factors may help explain
the intensity of the response. First, the clinical and epidemiological features of
SARS made its threat particularly ominous. The disease required no vector,
displayed no particular geographical affinity, mimicked the symptoms of many
other diseases, took its heaviest toll on hospital staff, killed around 10% of those
infected, and spread across borders with ease. SARS challenged the assumption
that wealthy nations, with their well-equipped hospitals and rigorous standards
of hygiene, would be shielded from its spread. Contrary to expectations, SARS
spread most efficiently in sophisticated urban hospitals. Clearly, the disease
could cause all countries great harm.


                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                       epidemic was stopped   49
                   Second, conditions in a closely
               interdependent and highly mobile world
               favoured its spread. With airlines carrying
               about 1.6 billion passengers yearly, every
               country with an international airport was at
               risk of importing the disease. The social
               disruption and economic losses caused by
               SARS were way out of proportion to the
               number of cases and deaths, and went well
               beyond the outbreak sites. News about the A masked investor watches the monitors showing
               disease jolted stock markets. Economic growth the       stocks index in Taipei on 13 May 2003. Share
                                                                   prices dropped with reports of new SARS cases.
               projections had to be lowered. Commerce
               suffered in distant countries that depended on Asian goods and manufacturing
               capacity. Schools, hospitals, businesses, and some borders were closed. The
               public, made deeply aware of SARS through electronic communications and
               extensive media coverage, worried about its spread. Travel to affected areas
               plummeted, causing losses of about US$ 10 billion to airlines with Asian routes.
               These consequences, apparent early on, drew political support at the highest
               level for the fight against the disease and increased pressure to contain the
               outbreak quickly. They also highlighted the need to join forces against a common
               threat.
                   Third, another new disease—AIDS—had tragically shown what could happen
               when an emerging disease is allowed to spread around the world and become
               endemic. AIDS had also shattered expectations that vaccines and curative drugs
               could be developed fast enough to prevent a new disease from spreading. Having
               learned from these experiences, public-health authorities considered prevention:
               perhaps an all-out effort might stop an emerging disease from becoming
               established as yet another permanent threat to health.
                                                       In coordinating the global response, WHO
                                                   aimed at the outset to help contain
                                                   transmission in affected countries, seal off
                                                   opportunities for further international spread,
                                                   and prevent SARS from becoming endemic.
                                                   Although neither the cause nor the potential
                                                   for the spread of the disease was known, WHO
                                                   set these ambitious goals with some solid
                                                   backing. Since 1996, the Organization had
     WHO’s global response to SARS was coordinated been developing and testing a system,
     by Dr David Heymann, Executive Director of
     Communicable Diseases at WHO Headquarters in  supported by a range of new mechanisms, to
     Geneva from 1998 to 2004.                     strengthen international capacity to detect and




       SARS: How a global
50     epidemic was stopped
contain outbreaks. These mechanisms, in turn, were an outgrowth of a previous
crisis: the 1995 outbreak of Ebola haemorrhagic fever in Kikwit, the Republic
of the Congo. That outbreak, which raged undetected for three months, caught
the international community by surprise and showed the urgent need to improve
capacity in several specific ways.
    In 1995, the world was ill prepared to respond to emerging and epidemic-
prone diseases on almost every level. The Congo was only one of many countries
where the public-health surveillance system was at best rudimentary.
Internationally, no back-up system gave early warning of unusual disease events
to compensate for this critical weakness. Infrastructure for detecting and
diagnosing unusual disease events had deteriorated worldwide. Laboratory
capacity was inadequate: some of the few biosafety level IV facilities had been
dismantled, and many laboratories no longer had the reagents to diagnose rare
diseases. International stockpiles of protective equipment and supplies were
either outdated or depleted, delaying and interrupting control measures. The
highly publicized Ebola outbreak, which caused 310 laboratory-confirmed cases,
250 of them fatal, showed that the very foundations of infectious-disease control
needed rebuilding. The urgency of the situation was formally acknowledged in
May 1995 when the World Health Assembly, in its first resolution on emerging
infections, asked WHO to draw up plans and strategies for improving world
capacity to recognize and respond to new diseases.


SOLUTIONS        TO LONG-STANDING PROBLEMS
    In 1996, WHO began building up a system,
and the supporting virtual architecture, to
detect outbreaks earlier and respond to them
more quickly and effectively. The Global
Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN),
developed and maintained for WHO by
Health Canada, continuously scans the
Internet for rumours and reports of suspicious
disease events. This sensitive early-warning
system introduced in 1997 far outpaced From left, Denise Werker, Dr Kande-Bure O’Bai
                                                   Kamara, and Dr Angela Merianos keep abreast of
traditional systems that raise an alert only after new developments in the Alert and Response
local case reports filter to the national level Operation Room at WHO Headquarters in Geneva.
and are passed on to WHO. GPHIN also
helped compensate for the reluctance, motivated by economic concerns, of
many national authorities to disclose outbreaks promptly and frankly.




                                                                            SARS: How a global
                                                                           epidemic was stopped     51
                To expand and formalize the response capacity, the Global Outbreak Alert
            and Response Network (GOARN) was set up in early 2000.1 A “strike force” of
            specialized staff and technical resources could now be rapidly assembled and
            deployed for emergency investigations and on-the-spot assistance. This
            overarching network links, in real time, 120 networks and institutes having
            much of the data, laboratory capacity, specialized skills, and experienced
            personnel needed to act rapidly on many different fronts when outbreaks require
            international assistance. As GOARN partners have a broad geographical base
            and many have staff in countries often affected by outbreaks, the network formally
            complements GPHIN’s “artificial intelligence” as a first-hand human source of
            early information about outbreaks.
                The establishment of GOARN solved several long-standing problems. First,
            being able to draw on the resources and expertise of a broad range of technical
            partners made it unnecessary to maintain a permanent staff of dedicated experts—
            with all the associated expenses—in the face of a danger that was sporadic and
            unpredictable. Second, as outbreaks demand widely varying controls, GOARN
            brought much-needed flexibility and a surge capacity that could be tailored to
            outbreak needs. It also helped ensure frequent opportunities for experts from
            any single country to practise and sharpen their technical skills during
            international responses. Finally, GOARN introduced a formal mechanism for
            balancing national and international strategic interests, particularly when the
            response to an outbreak in one country affects the international community.
                A new system of electronic communications was set up to make better use of
            a unique geographical and strategic resource: WHO’s 141 country offices,
            concentrated in the developing world and located within or close to ministries
            of health. These offices became yet another channel for instant news about
            diseases within countries, and for GOARN resources to come to the aid of those
            countries. With all these systems drawing abundant rumours, WHO at the same
            time took a novel approach to verifying rumoured outbreaks, to rapidly
            determine which ones were of genuine international concern, and then translating
            the findings into action-oriented information and transmitting it electronically
            to its partners.
                In other developments, a WHO surveillance network set up in 1947 to alert
            the world to new variants and novel strains of influenza viruses, especially those
            with pandemic potential, inspired similar electronically linked networks of experts
            and laboratories for other epidemic-prone diseases like dengue. All these
            developments drove sweeping changes in the International Health Regulations,
            which govern the reporting of epidemic-prone diseases worldwide and the
            application of measures to prevent their spread. The international response to
            SARS tested these new mechanisms simultaneously under the extreme conditions
            of a global public-health emergency.




     SARS: How a global
52   epidemic was stopped
INITIAL     SUSPICIONS: A “FATAL FLU”?
    In late November and early December 2002, GPHIN began picking up
rumours of a major “flu outbreak” in mainland China, said to affect large numbers
of schoolchildren. In investigating these rumours, WHO could rely on a new
network of laboratories established in China to strengthen global capacity for
influenza surveillance. On 12 December 2002, WHO received a detailed report
on data collected at surveillance sites in Beijing and Guangdong. Laboratory
analyses identified influenza B as the cause. The number of cases, compared
with the number during the same period in 2001, supported the conclusion
that influenza activity in both areas was normal for the season. Laboratories in
the global influenza network independently verified the findings. The results
were reassuring, also because they indicated that China’s new influenza network
was performing well.
    Then on 10 February 2003, the WHO country office in Beijing received an
email message describing a “strange contagious disease” that had “already left
more than 100 people dead in Guangdong Province in the space of one week”.
GPHIN also picked up media reports of an unusual epidemic of fatal pneumonia-
like illness in Guangdong. [See Chapter 1 for the subsequent events as WHO
sought to obtain more information on this outbreak, which eventually led to
the WHO alerts.]


ROLL-OUT        OF NEW RESPONSE MECHANISMS
    On 15 March, WHO issued its second,
stronger global alert, and quickly set in motion
all international mechanisms for outbreak
response. WHO issued case definitions and
reporting requirements, as well as tools for their
implementation, and began reporting cases as
they developed and assessing the evolving
situation daily on its website.
    The two alerts, widely carried by the Dr Shigeru Omi (left), Regional Director for the
international media, heightened the vigilance of Western      Pacific, confers with Dr Gro Harlem
                                                     Brundtland, then Director-General of WHO, at a
clinicians worldwide, and prodded ministries of SARS technical meeting on 27 May 2003 in Geneva.
health to report suspected cases to WHO through
country and regional offices, especially in the Western Pacific Region. Perhaps
most important, hospitals that detected possible cases followed WHO advice,
issued with the first alert, to isolate patients and manage them according to
strict procedures of infection control. WHO staff members also began tracking




                                                                             SARS: How a global
                                                                            epidemic was stopped      53
            and analysing the nearly 300 SARS-related rumours that GPHIN would retrieve
            from 83 countries during the four months of the international outbreak. Of
            these, well over a third proved substantive.
                On 17 March, WHO used a secure website, teleconferences, and
            videoconferences to set up virtual networks of scientists, epidemiologists at the
            outbreak sites, and clinicians. Setting aside competition, these experts
            collaborated around the clock to identify the cause of SARS, develop diagnostic
            tests, define clinical features, and investigate modes of transmission, all in record
            time. Within a month, the laboratory network traced SARS to a previously
            unknown coronavirus. The network of epidemiologists confirmed that the virus
            was transmitted through close person-to-person contact, collected data on
            incubation periods and peak infectivity, checked for evidence of asymptomatic
            transmission, tracked the significance of “super-spreading events”, and
            recommended control measures. The clinical network generated knowledge
            about the course of infection, the management of cases, and characteristic signs
            and symptoms seen at different outbreak sites.
                 SARS marked the first international outbreak in which information about a
            new disease was gathered and made public in real time, as the disease evolved.
            During the outbreak, WHO issued a score of guidelines and recommendations
            for responding to SARS. These ranged from advice on how to recognize and
            report cases, to instructions for performing diagnostic tests and guidelines for
            mass gatherings. To seal off further spread through international travel, travellers
            had to be given advice. Governments and a concerned public also had to be
            steered away from unsafe travel destinations. As the disease became better
            known, health officials gained confidence that the initially recommended control
            measures—case detection, contact tracing, isolation, and infection control—
            would eventually stop transmission.
                In the evolution of SARS, the global alerts of mid-March drew a clear line
            between the earliest outbreaks in China, Hong Kong (China), Hanoi, Toronto,
            and Singapore—all severe—and the reported cases in all other areas. Outbreaks
            before the global alerts accounted for about 90% of all cases and 79% of all
            deaths worldwide. After the alerts, high vigilance and preparedness, and rapid
            advice on control measures, prevented further spread or minimized the number
            of secondary cases in all areas with imported cases.
                On 5 July, WHO declared that all known chains of human-to-human
            transmission had been interrupted—a triumph of both political commitment
            and time-honoured control measures. The goal of preventing the new disease
            from becoming permanently established had been achieved.




     SARS: How a global
54   epidemic was stopped
REFERENCES

1
    Heymann DL, Rodier GR (WHO Operational Support Team to the Global
    Outbreak Alert and Response Network). Hot spots in a wired world: WHO
    surveillance of emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases. Lancet Infectious
    Diseases, 2001, 1(5):345–353.




                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                       epidemic was stopped   55
               3 RESPONSE OF THE
                WESTERN PACIFIC
                REGIONAL OFFICE


                Like most other epidemics, SARS came unannounced and unexpected. As it
             spread from southern China, it exposed patchy surveillance systems, weak public-
             health infrastructures, skill shortages, and neglected infection-control practices.
                SARS posed a challenge unlike any that WHO’s Regional Office in Manila
             had ever faced. This chapter describes how the Regional Office responded
             through experts from around the world working as a team. Most of these people
             had never worked together before. Now they joined forces to fight a common
             enemy.


             FIRST     RESPONSE
                                              News of an outbreak of atypical pneumonia in
                                           Guangdong reached the Regional Office on 10
                                           February. Nine days later came reports of avian influenza
                                           (H5N1) in a family in Hong Kong (China) that had been
                                           in Fujian Province, China. The Regional Office went
                                           on heightened alert. As Regional Adviser in
                                           Communicable Disease Surveillance and Response
                                           (CSR), Dr Hitoshi Oshitani was used to dealing with a
                                           whole range of communicable disease issues, including
                                           outbreaks, in the 37 countries and areas of the Western
     Dr Hitoshi Oshitani, Regional Adviser
                                           Pacific Region. But aside from Dr Oshitani, there was
     in Communicable Disease Surveillance  only Dr Elizabeth Miranda (on a short-term assignment
     and Response, spearheaded WHO’s
     response to SARS in the Western
                                           in rabies control) in CSR at the Regional Office, under
     Pacific Region.                       Dr Brian Doberstyn, Director of the Division for
               Combating Communicable Disease. No response team stood ready to act at the
               first sign of a major outbreak.
                   By Friday, 7 March 2003, as the outbreak in Hanoi was rapidly evolving, it
               was clear that WHO needed more support. Dr Carlo Urbani, WHO Medical



      SARS: How a global
56    epidemic was stopped
Officer in Viet Nam, urgently emailed Drs Oshitani and Doberstyn in the
afternoon: “Situation is scaling up. … I request technical assistance.”
    The data from Viet Nam suggested that the outbreak was spreading to close
contacts. Supplies such as masks and gowns, as well as technical assistance,
would be needed to prevent the spread.
    Dr Oshitani was in Beijing, tracking down information about the Guangdong
outbreak and the H5N1 situation in Fujian. He had been in Beijing since
23 February and would go from there to Viet Nam on 10 March [see Chapter 5].
He would not be back in the Regional Office for another week.
    Meanwhile, Dr Doberstyn formed an ad hoc emergency team in the Regional
Office, and the task of obtaining supplies fell to the team’s first recruit that
Friday. Dr David Bell had been working on malaria tests. Over the next week
he would have to master equipment specifications and sources.
    A constant flow of email bloated the workload. “I called it the black wall,”
Dr Bell remembers. “I would go for coffee having cleared my email inbox, and
on my return the screen had gone black again, full of unread email. But we
knew we had to do all that we could to get the needed supplies to protect the
health-care workers in Viet Nam—and, of course, for other countries if it spread.”
    For Dr Bell and others in the emergency team, the weekend of 8–9 March
marked the end of normal life. Work took over nearly every waking hour, even
on weekends. Little time was left for sleep.


“HOW      SOON CAN YOU BE HERE?”
    On Tuesday, 11 March, Dr Doberstyn called Dr Rob Condon, a communicable
disease control specialist, in the WHO South Pacific office in Suva, Fiji.
    “There’s something happening in Viet Nam,” Dr Doberstyn said. “It’s already
forced a hospital in Hanoi to close and we think it’s just appeared in Hong Kong.
We don’t know what it is, we don’t know how it’s spreading, but HQ is putting
out a global health alert tomorrow. We need you to get here as soon as you
can—today if possible.”
    A cyclone was raging just south of Fiji. Suva airport was closed and all aircraft
had been grounded. But at 5:30 the next morning, Dr Condon was on the first
flight out of Suva, on his way to Manila.
    Over the days and weeks to come, the same call to arms would be heard
and answered around the world. Dr Keiji Fukuda, an influenza expert from the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, just happened to be in
the right place. He was in Hong Kong on 11 March, at the government’s
invitation, to review the avian influenza A (H5N1) cases reported on 19 February.
He stayed for several weeks as WHO team leader in Hong Kong, working in
close collaboration with the Hong Kong health authorities. He was also part of
the WHO team in Beijing.



                                                                         SARS: How a global
                                                                        epidemic was stopped   57
                 Figure 3.1 Experts stationed in the Region (March to July 2003)




            FIRST     GLOBAL ALERT: QUESTIONS WITHOUT ANSWERS
                 On the morning of 13 March, the Manila emergency team met, tired and a
            little shaken by the recent events. The global alert from Geneva the night before
            had raised the stakes considerably. War had been declared on the new infectious
            disease. All the known cases were in the Western Pacific Region, so the Manila
            office would be in the front line.
                 The team knew that the index case in Hanoi had been evacuated to Hong Kong
            on 6 March and was already dead. Many of the doctors and nurses who had
            treated him in Hanoi were now showing signs of the same illness, as were
            health-care workers in Hong Kong. And Dr Urbani himself was under observation
            in the isolation ward of a hospital in Bangkok.
                 Were the cases in Hanoi and Hong Kong linked? How were they related to
            the Guangdong outbreak and the reported cases of avian influenza A (H5N1)?
            What were the odds of three unrelated outbreaks of respiratory illness occurring
            at the same time in neighbouring countries? Where would the disease strike
            next? Was this the start of what many experts thought to be overdue: the next
            influenza pandemic?
                 Or could a genetically manipulated agent of biological warfare have been
            released, by chance or on purpose? After all, had al-Qaeda not threatened to
            follow up the 11 September attacks on New York with targeted strikes on
            “unexpected places”, using chemical, biological, and other weapons?

     SARS: How a global
58   epidemic was stopped
   WHO experts had to answer these questions to help control the outbreaks in
Hanoi and Hong Kong. They would also have to delve further into the situation
in Guangdong, and help health officials in neighbouring countries prepare for
the worst—the imminent arrival of an unknown disease with global implications.


SECOND ALERT: MOMENTUM BUILDS
    By Saturday, 15 March, new cases had been identified in Singapore and
Toronto, and on flight SQ25 from New York to Singapore. The disease could
evidently travel by plane. Urgent teleconferences between the Regional Office,
Singapore, and Geneva discussed flight SQ25 and the implications for global
spread. That evening, WHO issued a second, more strongly worded, health
alert.
    It spelled out the agreed case definition and potential risks to international
travellers, and urged heightened surveillance and the rapid isolation and
appropriate management of suspected cases.1 A new word was born: SARS.
    By Monday, 17 March, the situation looked grim. Patients were not
responding to the antibiotics or antiviral medications commonly used to treat
atypical pneumonia. Up to one-fifth needed respirators. Not one had recovered;
at least two had died, and more were likely to follow. And hospital workers
were still prominent among the new cases.
    But the actions needed to control the disease were clear. Infections in hospital
had to be prevented, through the use of personal protective equipment. Cases
had to be isolated as soon as possible; and contacts traced and followed up.


THE    OPERATIONS ROOM
   A room on the fourth floor opposite Dr Doberstyn’s office, which had been
used for training, became the operations room. At first, with only one telephone
and one computer, team members dashed from one office to another as anxious
colleagues in Geneva, Hanoi, and then Hong Kong sought to make contact.




SARS operations room in WHO’s Regional Office in Manila




                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                       epidemic was stopped   59
                The makeshift arrangement soon morphed into a full-fledged SARS operations
            room, with secretarial support, extra telephone lines, networked computers,
            whiteboards, and maps of Viet Nam and southern China on the walls.
                The workday started when the sun rose over Fiji and ended when it set over
            the Americas. Workdays averaged between 12 and 16 hours, and in the early
            days, staff worked up to 20-hour days. Life revolved around regular meetings
            and teleconferences, interrupted only by hurried meals and occasional bouts of
            sleep [see Box 3.1].
                The daily meetings kept everyone in the loop in the early days. New
            knowledge had to be shared, especially with new team members (some of them
            in transit to the field), who were arriving in a constant stream and needed to be
            briefed and assigned roles. But as information about SARS in medical journals
            began to outstrip the capacity of team members to keep up, the meetings became
            staff development and journal club sessions. These were often attended by visiting
            dignitaries and consultants as they entered or left the resource pool, by television
            crews, and often by the Regional Director.Box 3.1 SARS team schedule


                                                  Box 3.1 SARS team schedule
               Daily
                •   Meeting of all team members at 8 a.m. and at 4 p.m.
                •   Meeting of the human-resource planning and logistics team to identify, recruit, and deploy consultants.
                •   Teleconference with all the country teams and Headquarters.
               Weekly
                •   Two to three meetings with WHO teams in affected countries to share information, as well as
                    challenges, victories, and disappointments.
                •   Two teleconferences with WHO Representatives in countries not directly affected—one with Pacific
                    countries and a separate one with Asian countries.
                •   Meetings with three global groups of technical experts—epidemiological, clinical (including infection
                    control), and laboratory—to share state-of-the-art knowledge, further data needs, and research
                    priorities.
                •   Two teleconferences with senior WHO management at Headquarters and in the five other WHO
                    regional offices at 10 p.m. or 11 p.m. (These were held daily at the start.)
               When needed
                •   Media interviews and conferences.



                A way was eventually found to sort out and coordinate the jumble of meetings
            and teleconferences. And the search for more specialists—epidemiologists,
            infection-control practitioners, laboratory experts, and logisticians—to join the
            team at the Regional Office or in the field went on [see Figure 3.1]. [Appendix 5
            lists all the staff, consultants, and members of other organizations that were
            involved in the Region’s response.]




     SARS: How a global
60   epidemic was stopped
PLAN OF ATTACK
    The aim was to stop transmission and prevent the virus from becoming
endemic. Therefore, the team had to help contain the outbreaks in affected
areas and prevent the virus from spreading elsewhere. The SARS team organized
itself into a SARS Response Group, to support the teams in the field in the
affected areas, and a SARS Preparedness Group, to minimize the risks of
importation into countries not yet affected by SARS, strengthen surveillance in
those countries, and develop contingency plans for responding to a crisis
[Figure 3.2].


      Figure 3.2 SARS Outbreak Response and Preparedness Team




   As governments and health workers (and other people) fought the virus,
WHO provided a range of support, a critical one being collecting, analysing,
and sharing information [see Box 3.2 and Chapter 4].
   WHO sent teams to China (including Hong Kong and Taiwan), and to
Mongolia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Viet Nam. Public-health and infection-
control experts also visited unaffected countries.




                                                                     SARS: How a global
                                                                    epidemic was stopped   61
             FINDING         THE PEOPLE, AND MOVING THEM
                                                                      The fight against SARS needed
                                                                   experts in epidemiology, surveillance,
                                                                   public health, clinical diagnosis and
                                                                   infection control, animal health,
                                                                   laboratory diagnosis and biosafety,
                                                                   environmental        health,       data
                                                                   management, logistics, and media
                                                                   relations.
                                                                      The Regional Office had to find the
                                                                   right people with the right skills who
     The SARS team met twice a day to share information. From
     left, Zenaida Cariaga, Dr Richard Nesbit, Dr Brian Doberstyn, could also move at short notice. The
     Dr Hitoshi Oshitani, Dr Robert Condon, Dr Mahomed Patel,      Global Outbreak Alert and Response
     Dr Takeshi Kasai, Rosanne Muller, and Peter Vanquaille.
                                                                   Network (GOARN) [see Chapter 2]
                                                                   and WHO Headquarters helped. But
                with most of GOARN’s resources tied down in Europe and North America, the
                Regional Office itself had to do most of the finding.
                    Existing formal and informal networks within the Region were used and
                developed, particularly the Training in Epidemiology and Public Health
                Intervention Programs Network (TEPHINET), Field Epidemiology Training
                Programmes (FETPs), and academic institutions. The FETPs in Australia, Japan,
                and the Philippines were an excellent source of junior and senior epidemiologists.
                    Normal administrative procedures were neither responsive enough nor
                flexible enough to respond to large-scale emergencies. All aspects of
                administration—personnel, recruitment, finance, budgeting, and travel—had
                to change.
                    The Regional Office hired a logistician, Peter Vanquaille, to help find and
                recruit people. Setting aside other obligations, he travelled at short notice,
                arriving in Manila on 7 April. “I had been working in all kinds of emergencies
                before, in the field and in capitals around the world,” he recalls. “I thought that
                I had previously reached the limits of the amount of work that I could do. But in
                Manila, with the SARS team, I went beyond those limits. Only sleep interrupted
                the work. But it was all worthwhile, not just because the task was an important
                one, but also because of a sense of partnership with the team.”
                    WHO normally takes weeks to recruit consultants. With SARS, recruitment
                had to be fast-tracked down to a few days “Three days was the shortest time I
                managed to get a consultant on the plane, including all the paperwork done,”
                Mr Vanquaille remembers. “The initial medical clearance was done over the
                phone while I was reading the medical history to the nurse. The consultant
                arrived at the airport before the ticket. So with one phone I was guiding the
                consultant, and with the other phone I was talking with the travel agent to get
                the ticket there. An hour later, the consultant was on the plane.”


      SARS: How a global
62    epidemic was stopped
 Box 3.2 Range of activities for WHO consultants and teams in countries, in coordination
                                   with governments
    • Investigating possible cases and outbreaks, and exploring the dynamics and risk factors of
      transmission, and the effectiveness of control measures
    • Adapting and implementing public-health, clinical, infection-control, and laboratory guidelines, and
      developing the knowledge and skills of clinicians, nurses, laboratory scientists, and other health-care
      staff
    • Assessing the ongoing risk and minimizing the spread of SARS in health-care settings, laboratories,
      communities, airports and seaports, and all forms of public transport
    • Assessing and helping strengthen the degree of prevention and preparedness (through training
      workshops and other means)
    • Advancing and supporting immediate essential research to improve the understanding of SARS
    • Communicating with the media
    • Monitoring and mobilizing resources



     Most of the consultants were recruited quickly, thanks to the personnel,
medical, and administrative units of the Regional Office and their willingness
to circumvent normal procedure. However, it was not always smooth going.
With no clear operating procedures for emergencies, personalities could
sometimes get in the way. Mr Vanquaille says, “Staying professional with that
little, but important, personal touch of treating people with friendliness and
equal respect, had an effect almost like magic.”


SUPPLIES       AND PROCUREMENT
    On Sunday, 9 March, Peter King, Supplies
Officer at the Regional Office, was enjoying
the weekend when he got a telephone call
from Dr Doberstyn. Supplies had been ordered
for a preparedness kit a short time before. Dr
Doberstyn wanted to know where the supplies
were.
    “Did you indicate that the order was
urgent?” Mr King replied. He quickly learnt
that what had been routine was now urgently
needed. Preparedness was now response. And       SARS kit assembled by the WHO Regional                         Office
it would be months before Mr King got
another leisure day.
    Both affected and unaffected countries needed various supplies—personal
protective equipment, drugs like ribavirin (which at first was thought to help in
treatment), supplies for collecting and shipping laboratory samples, and
everything from respirator hoods to gum boots. Finding those supplies in the
required volume, and then shipping them out rapidly, was the main challenge.



                                                                                                SARS: How a global
                                                                                               epidemic was stopped      63
                                           Procurement, especially when it has to be done over
                                           several time zones, was not a straightforward process.
                                              Thanks to a good relationship between the Regional
                                           Office and the Government of Japan, US$ 3 million was
                                           immediately secured, through the Japan International
                                           Cooperation Agency (JICA). The swift response, as well
                                           as JICA’s operating flexibility in the release of funds,
                                           helped the supplies team meet requirements even as
                                           these were constantly revised.
                                              But all the money in the world cannot buy what is
     Japan, and other donors, responded
     quickly to WHO’s call for assistance, not available. There were general shortages in supplies
     enabling the purchase of supplies.    (especially N-95 masks), aggravated by the Iraq War.
               Individual suppliers could also provide only a small fraction of what was needed.
               Mr King had to contact suppliers in many countries. And WHO had no system
               for doing this.
                   A special computer program had to be written to manage the new challenges
               of procuring and distributing these materials throughout the Region.


              FUNDING         SUPPORT
                  Besides funding support from Japan for supplies, other donors provided funds
              for the massive response implemented by the Regional Office, as well as directly
              to countries.


              PREPAREDNESS IN UNAFFECTED COUNTRIES
                  From the outset, a major focus of control efforts was preventing SARS from
              reaching unaffected countries. In addition to preparing guidelines to help these
              countries, WHO dispatched consultants to give support.
                  Cambodia and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, with their poor public
              health infrastructure, were thought to be most at risk. Papua New Guinea and
              the other Pacific island countries and areas also benefited from rapid assessments
              of public-health and infection-control preparedness. One consultant island-
              hopped non-stop in eight weeks to assess 10 different areas (Fiji, Guam, Kiribati,
              Nauru, Tonga, Palau, Saipan, Samoa, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu).
                  In one country, a WHO consultant tested readiness by pretending to have
              SARS on arrival. She was pleased to find that the airport was well prepared, but
              news of her arrival had travelled to the hospital. When she arrived, she saw the
              last of the staff fleeing the premises.




       SARS: How a global
64     epidemic was stopped
WORKING         WITH THE MEDIA
    An early challenge for the SARS team was responding to the surging media
interest. At the height of the crisis, WHO’s three-person Public Information
Office in Manila was fielding hundreds of phone calls a day. There were also
live television and radio interviews (including regular late-night calls from radio
stations as far away as Bolivia and Croatia) and requests for information from
embassies, corporations, schools, and members of the public. Like the rest of
the SARS team, the public information team spent practically every waking
hour at work.
    Peter Cordingley, a freelance journalist, had
just been hired by the Regional Office for short-
term editorial work entirely unrelated to
communicable diseases. At the time, the position
of Public Information Officer was vacant. When
the calls started coming in, Mr Cordingley was
catapulted into the hot seat as head of the media
team.
    “It was a challenge,” he said. “I didn’t know a
lot about communicable diseases, but the truth Peter Cordingley (left), Public Information
is that none of us—the experts included—knew Officer, at a press conference with Jean-Marc
                                                      Olivé, WHO Representative in the Philippines.
much about SARS. So we learned together: how
the virus was spreading, how to spot it, and how
to stop it. It was all a long way from what I had been hired to do, but, like
everyone else on the team, I found it the experience of a lifetime.”
    Mr Cordingley’s desk turned into a sea of yellow as Post-It notes from his
assistants, Marilu Lingad and Teena Nery, tallied phone calls from journalists.
“No matter how busy the day got, I tried to return each call,” Mr Cordingley
said, “even though I knew that in some cases it would be past the journalist’s
deadline. It seemed to me that the trust of the media was going to be an important
element in the battle, and I didn’t want to lose that. So I did my best to deliver
what I knew from experience that all journalists need: an honest assessment of
the situation, with no smokescreens or public-relations babble designed to throw
them off the track.”
    As the disease spread in China, a series of media officers were appointed in
Beijing. Bob Dietz, who was one of them, remembers, “I arrived in Beijing on
a near-empty plane to find an almost deserted airport. The city, which I had
grown to know after many visits over the years, was eerily empty. Not only
were the customary traffic jams gone, but there were hardly any cars on the
streets. My favourite restaurants, if they had managed to stay open, were deserted.




                                                                              SARS: How a global
                                                                             epidemic was stopped     65
                                                      It was an indication of the fear SARS was
                                                      causing—and a measure of the size of the job
                                                      that awaited me.”
                                                          The media officers in Geneva, Manila,
                                                      Beijing, and Hanoi kept information flowing
                                                      to the media almost round the clock. “We
                                                      made mistakes,” Mr Cordingley acknowledged
                                                      later, “but I think it’s fair to say we set some of
     Media relied heavily on WHO for accurate, up-to- the rules about how to respond to a public
     date information on the SARS situation in the    health crisis.” The influential South China
     Western Pacifc Region.
                                                      Morning Post in Hong Kong (China) agreed.
                                                      In its issue of 25 February 2004, it cited the
               way Mr Cordingley had handled his public information responsibilities during
               the crisis as a prime example of how to communicate with the media.
                   For the media and everyone else, the Western Pacific Region’s website
               became a one-stop guide to SARS—how national health services should prepare
               for the disease, which were the best masks to wear in a health-care setting, how
               to wash one’s hands (a video offered on the site showed the correct way). This
               service, coupled with near-daily updates on the developing global situation
               and mountains of technical input on the website of WHO Headquarters,
               demonstrated the surging power of the Internet as a public-health tool.


              EPILOGUE
                 The SARS outbreak highlighted the need to strengthen the weakest links in
              the outbreak surveillance and response chain, even as it tested new methods of
              collaboration. Improvements here should lead to generic improvements in other
              diagnostic, monitoring, and evaluation tools of public health.
                 Basic public-health principles defeated SARS. But the next virus may not be
              so easy to tame. The SARS response—rapid, effective, global as well as specific—
              must be the foundation for longer-term control of known diseases and emerging
              ones.



              REFERENCES

              1
                  World Health Organization issues emergency travel advisory. Geneva, World
                  Health Organization, 15 March 2003 (http://www.who.int/csr/sarsarchive/
                  2003_03_15/en/, accessed 1 April 2005).




       SARS: How a global
66     epidemic was stopped
         4 SURVEILLANCE


    The SARS outbreak had its origin and epicentre in the Western Pacific Region.
By 5 July 2003, when all chains of transmission had been broken, 96% of cases
had occurred here. It was therefore in this Region that surveillance was most
critical—and where the epidemiological analysis of the surveillance data would
be most informative.
    To combat any disease, health authorities must know where the cases are,
what sorts of people have caught the disease, and how it is spreading. These
questions form the basis of a disease surveillance system.
    In the case of SARS, its consequences, its unknown cause, and its emerging
potential for rapid international spread made setting up a regionally coordinated
surveillance system a matter of utmost urgency. The system would ultimately
prove to be an essential element in the fight against SARS. It allowed WHO to
assess which countries were affected or at imminent risk, to learn about patterns
of transmission, and to prevent further local and international spread. In the
gathering and sharing of information, the role of the Internet was unprecedented.


SETTING UP SURVEILLANCE
    Surveillance is defined in the dictionaries as “close observation, especially
of suspected persons”. Disease surveillance, just like military surveillance,
involves gathering and assessing intelligence from a variety of sources.
    With SARS, as with any other outbreak, the first step in setting up a surveillance
system was to establish standard case definitions. When WHO issued its second
alert on 15 March 2003, the case definitions were very simple [see Box 4.1].
    The case definition had to be very sensitive so that no cases would be missed.
But that meant that it was also very non-specific, especially in areas with
transmission, where travel history could not be used to exclude most cases. As
fever and respiratory symptoms are very common, this created a considerable
challenge.
    More experience with the new disease allowed clinicians in the outbreak
areas to define cases better (although atypical presentations would subsequently
lead to chains of transmission in several areas).
    Once the new coronavirus was confirmed as the cause of SARS and laboratory
tests became available, the tests could verify the presence of the infection. On
1 May 2003, the case definitions were revised to include the use of laboratory

                                                                          SARS: How a global
                                                                         epidemic was stopped   67
                                    Box 4.1 SARS case definitions, WHO, 15 March 2003

              Clinical definition for suspect case                    Clinical definition for probable case
                  A person presenting with a history of:                   A person meeting the suspect case definition
                  - Fever (over 38°C)                                      together with severe progressive respiratory
                                                                           illness suggestive of atypical pneumonia or
                 AND
                                                                           acute respiratory distress syndrome with no
                  - One or more respiratory symptoms                       known cause
                    including cough, shortness of breath,
                                                                          OR
                    difficulty breathing
                                                                           A person with an unexplained acute
                 AND
                                                                           respiratory illness resulting in death, with an
                  - Close contact* with a probable case                    autopsy examination demonstrating the
                 OR                                                        pathology of acute respiratory distress
                                                                           syndrome with no known cause
                  - Recent history of travel (within 10 days) to
                    Asia, especially in areas reporting cases of
                    SARS
            * Close contact means having cared for, live with, or had face-to-face (within one metre) contact with, or
            having had direct contact with respiratory secretions and/or body fluids of a person with SARS.
            Source: World Health Organization issues emergency travel advisory. Geneva, World Health Organization,
            2003 (http://www.who.int/csr/sars/archive/2003_03_15/en/).


            tests [see Appendix 4]. Unfortunately, frequent false-negative results early in
            the course of the illness, when control actions were most necessary, limited the
            usefulness of the laboratory tests.
                WHO requested all affected countries to report daily on new cases that met
            the case definitions. The reports were to include the number of new cases and
            running totals of SARS cases and deaths. Daily reporting was requested, even
            when there were no new cases, to make sure that there were indeed no new
            cases and that a country had not simply neglected to send in its report on a
            given day. A standard reporting format was developed to help countries submit
            clear, consistent, readily analysable information. Throughout the reporting
            process, the Internet again proved invaluable, with many reports being submitted
            by email to the national level and on to WHO.


            SURVEILLANCE INFORMATION
               The SARS surveillance system transcended the usual mechanisms of public-
            health surveillance in two main respects: the level of detail and the speed of
            information gathering and dissemination. In-country teams needed more detail
            than conventional surveillance systems provide, to track down possible contacts
            and previously unrecognized routes of transmission. To allow authorities to
            control an emerging outbreak before it could spread, the information also had
            to be obtained very actively and very quickly.
               The system gathered information through two channels: “official” (reports
            sent to WHO by ministries of health) and “unofficial” (unconfirmed rumours).
            These two types of information had to be handled very differently.


     SARS: How a global
68   epidemic was stopped
OFFICIAL SURVEILLANCE DATA
    From the numbers of “probable” SARS cases in the daily case reports, the
WHO team in the Western Pacific Regional Office plotted epidemic curves and
distribution maps. In this way they could monitor the progress of local
transmission and rapidly identify changes in the geographical distribution of
cases. The Regional Office sent this information daily to WHO Headquarters in
Geneva (for publication on the WHO website), to member countries, and to
the media.
    To assess transmission risk and guide travel advisories, it was important to
know whether SARS in a particular country was spreading only among close
contacts or more widely in the community. WHO devised a system for classifying
SARS-affected countries according to their pattern of local transmission [see
Appendix 3].
    The WHO team paid special attention to cases associated with international
air travel [see Chapter 15]. Seating and flight information was recorded so that
any in-flight transmission (such as a passenger from a SARS-affected country
developing symptoms after arriving in another country) could later be
investigated.
    These investigations directly influenced global policy for cross-border protection.
Working with the International Civil Aviation Organization, the International Air
Transport Authority, and national quarantine officials, WHO drew up exit-screening
guidelines for passengers from SARS-affected countries, and airlines developed
procedures for managing passengers with symptoms of SARS.
    Some countries delayed the reporting of known SARS cases because of the
economic implications. In other countries and areas, where information was
openly shared, media coverage still outpaced government reporting. The official
reporting therefore had to be supplemented, and rumour surveillance filled this
need.


RUMOUR SURVEILLANCE
    Dictionaries commonly define rumour as “information, often a mixture of
truth and untruth, told by one person to another” or “a story or statement widely
spread, without proof as to facts”.
    Fear of this unknown disease that was spreading rapidly around the globe fed
rumours in the print and electronic media and among the general public, especially
early in the outbreak, when little was known about how the disease was transmitted.
Government staff in affected countries and staff of international and
nongovernmental organizations also forwarded rumours to WHO. Examples of
the types of rumours that the team had to deal with daily are shown in Box 4.2.




                                                                           SARS: How a global
                                                                          epidemic was stopped   69
                   Box 4.2 Examples of rumours received and investigated by the Regional Office
              An anonymous email sent directly to WHO by a member of the public:
              I'm a foreign student … doing an internship in XXX and I can confirm from a medical source that, last week,
              a hospital in the city … admitted 5 people suffering from SARS. … At least one of them is dead. Thank you
              for verifying and publishing this information. Good luck.

              A rumour from the media:
              SARS disclosed: A Corner Of The Iceberg Meltdown: Last year in October, all villagers in one village in XXX
              suffered from a mysterious disease and all died.



               WHO played an important role in evaluating and responding to such rumours
            by seeking further investigation, clarification, and action, and guiding the
            countries in this matter at the national level. Figure 4.1 shows how the rumours
            were sifted and verified or dismissed. Two thirds of the rumours were later
            confirmed.


                                    Figure 4.1 Rumour surveillance process




     SARS: How a global
70   epidemic was stopped
PART II: COUNTRY
    AND AREA
  PERSPECTIVES




               SARS: How a global
              epidemic was stopped   71
     SARS: How a global
72   epidemic was stopped
         5 CHINA: FROM
         DENIAL TO MASS
          MOBILIZATION


    The spring air in Beijing normally entices residents outdoors to the city’s
public places and parks. But in the spring of 2003, with the city in the grip of
SARS, the air had never seemed so tainted. Some city residents were terrified to
venture outdoors, fearing possible infection from the peripatetic movement of
air and people.
    By late April, quiet had fallen over the hutongs, or alleys, the lines at Bank of
China branches had disappeared, bus and bicycle traffic had thinned, and tourism
had come to a standstill. At Western Station, the main rail terminal, passenger
traffic dropped by 75%. Normally a city teeming with 13 million people, Beijing
seemed at times like a ghost town.
    The SARS virus brought the public-health system to its knees while battering
the country’s political and economic front. The Asian Development Bank put
the cost to Asian economies at about US$ 60 billion.1 And China was at the
epicentre of the escalating epidemic.
    When the virus emerged in China, the public-health infrastructure was sadly
underfunded and the country ill prepared to respond. China failed to issue a
warning as the virus spread across the country and outside its borders.
    During this difficult time, WHO approached China several times by way of
telephone calls, letters, and face-to-face encounters, including a tense meeting
in Hong Kong (China) on 22 March 2003, when WHO’s Regional Director for
the Western Pacific, Dr Shigeru Omi, pressed China’s Minister of Health for
more information and access to Guangdong Province.
    The international community and the media also kept up the pressure to
respond. Once China’s central government realized that it needed to seriously
tackle this new disease, the turnaround was impressive. By late April, China had
started to mobilize its entire society in a “people’s war” against SARS. Victory
soon followed.




                                                                         SARS: How a global
                                                                        epidemic was stopped   73
              AN INCUBATOR FOR VIRUSES
                  Most newly emerging diseases come from animals. In southern China, the
              local penchant for exotic foods, the presence of unhygienic wet markets, high
              population density, and poor animal-husbandry practices—farm animals are
              often reared right beside pets and people—all favour the transfer of a virus from
              an animal to a human host.

              AVIAN     INFLUENZA

                 Guangdong has invited special attention from WHO disease-control experts
              because of concerns about avian influenza. In 1997, Hong Kong reported 18
              cases of avian influenza A(H5N1) in humans, six of whom died. Countries feared
              that China was not reporting the real source of the disease. To provide some
              assurance that no outbreak of avian influenza was going undetected in China, a
              joint team from the Ministry of Health and WHO reviewed the animal and
              human disease surveillance and response system in the southern part of the
              country in January 1998. The team visited epidemiology units, hospitals,
              laboratories, and chicken-production facilities, and met with staff from both
              the animal and human health services. No evidence of an outbreak was found.

              ANIMAL      MARKETS

                                                               Animal markets in the provincial capital,
                                                            Guangzhou, offer a medley of live animals
                                                            for culinary delicacies, such as civet cats,
                                                            snakes, turtles, badgers, hedgehogs, and frogs,
                                                            bringing rare viruses ever closer to humans.
                                                            Outbreak experts, aware of the health risks
                                                            these live markets present, keep a close watch
                                                            on the area. Reports of a new disease in the
                                                            area drew the immediate attention of Dr
     A stall owner in the South China Wild Animal Market    Hitoshi Oshitani, WHO’s Regional Adviser for
     in Guangzhou eating his breakfast next to empty
     cages that used to house raccoon dogs, civet cats      Communicable Disease Surveillance and
     and snakes sold for food.                              Response.


              FIRST       REPORTS:         WHO             SEEKS EPIDEMIOLOGICAL
              INFORMATION
                 On 10 February, the first working day for many people after the weeklong
              Chinese New Year holiday, the WHO Representative in China, Dr Henk
              Bekedam, began receiving reports about an alarming outbreak in Guangdong
              Province. The son of a former WHO staff member sent this email to Alan Schnur,




       SARS: How a global
74     epidemic was stopped
the Communicable Disease Team Leader of WHO China: “Am wondering if
you would have information on the strange contagious disease (similar to
pneumonia with invalidating effect on lung) which has already left more than
100 people dead in … Guangdong Province, in the space of 1 week. The outbreak
is not allowed to be made known to the public via the media, but people are
already aware of it (through hospital workers) and there is a ‘panic’ attitude,
currently, where people are emptying pharmaceutical stocks of any medicine
they think may protect them.”
    Mr Schnur forwarded the email at once to the Ministry of Health, and sought
information. He added that the American embassy had passed on a similar
rumour about a strange disease that was causing bleeding and many deaths in
Guangzhou. Similar queries came from other embassies. Mr Schnur also told
Dr Oshitani and WHO Headquarters about the reports. An official letter from
WHO to the Ministry followed.
    For the WHO office in China, such rumours were not unusual. Almost without
exception, they were generally found to be false and based on some
misunderstanding. An international event may have been cancelled without
explanation, or the Government may have launched a vaccination drive without
clearly informing the public that it merely sought to prevent and not to stop an
epidemic. The new rumours therefore raised no great concern. But because
they came from Guangdong, an area of risk for avian influenza, which could be
reported as atypical pneumonia, the WHO office set aside its backlog of work
and acted promptly on the rumours.
    A senior local scientist maintained that chlamydiae bacteria had caused the
outbreak. The theory was so prevailing that it proved inhibiting in a culture of
deference to authority and seniority. When scientists in Beijing identified a new
virus in late February, they chose not to say anything about it.2
    WHO would continue to seek information from the Ministry of Health, while
also urging that a WHO team be allowed to investigate the outbreak in
Guangdong. That permission would not be given until 2 April. When the WHO
team finally went to Guangdong, they found that the province was managing
the outbreak well.
    By that time, clusters of cases had already appeared in several cities near
Guangzhou. The first case was found on 16 November 2002 in Foshan City and
the second on 17 December in Heyuan City, in a chef dealing with exotic game
animals.3 Then, between 26 December and 20 January, 28 cases were recognized
in Zhongshan City.3 Two clusters, of several cases each, were also found in
neighbouring Guangxi Province in December and January.
    On 21 February, the virus travelled out of Guangdong to Hong Kong, where
guests at a hotel would be infected and later carry the virus across the globe.




                                                                      SARS: How a global
                                                                     epidemic was stopped   75
             INFORMATION          GRIDLOCK
                   Myths grew amid a dearth of information. An immediate response to the
               new disease was needed. China’s decentralized disease-surveillance system
               tended to limit information exchange between levels. Also, since SARS was a
               new disease, there was as yet no official reporting requirement for it.
                   SARS demonstrated the crucial need for accurate and timely information.
               Many questions arose and some answers—that smoking prevented SARS, for
               example—were incorrect. Some myths were downright dangerous. Boiling
               vinegar, supposedly to purify air, led to carbon monoxide poisoning from
               charcoal fires. How many were affected by this practice is not known.4
                                                            In early 2003, white vinegar and herbal
                                                         medicines were selling briskly in some
                                                         Guangdong cities. The air swirled with
                                                         rumours about a contagious disease and locals
                                                         were nervous. On 4 January, the Heyuan
                                                         News ran a letter from the local disease-
                                                         control centre calling for calm. Alarmed
                                                         locals were stocking up on medicines such
                                                         as banlangen, a traditional cold therapy made
     Assistants at a Chinese medicine shop prepare       from the indigo tree. Provincial health
     traditional medicines for clients worried about the
     SARS virus.                                         authorities sent a team to investigate. The
               team’s head, Guangzhou respiratory specialist Dr Xiao Zhenglun, found the
               city in “chaos”. In mid-January, residents of Zhongshan City were rushing to
               buy medicines, vinegar, and even food. Two months later, banlangen would
               also disappear from shelves in Beijing.
                   In China, disease outbreaks are investigated and controlled by local health
               officials, who typically refer outbreaks up the command chain only when they
               need help. Only a few diseases must be reported immediately to higher
               authorities, and even these have to be reported only after the source has been
               investigated and confirmed locally. This system worked well when people were
               much less mobile and stayed put in their counties or provinces. With rapid
               economic development and increased mobility, however, the old system could
               not respond fast enough to a new threat like SARS.
                   The disease was barely covered by the media, creating a fertile environment
               for the spread of rumours. Chinese journalists say they were dissuaded. At a
               press conference on 11 February, Guangdong health authorities announced
               that the outbreak of atypical pneumonia had started on 16 November 2002
               and had affected 305 people, only five of whom had died. Then they quickly
               focussed attention on the National People’s Congress in Beijing in March, where
               a new president, premier, and Government would be chosen. Outsiders found
               the information that was filtering out of China hard to believe. They feared the
               outbreak was far worse.


      SARS: How a global
76    epidemic was stopped
    The media turned to the WHO office for information that the Ministry of
Health and Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (China CDC)
were unable or unwilling to provide. By the first week after the initial report on
10 February, the local media had identified the WHO office as a potential
source of information on the new disease. It appeared that the potential spread
of a new and deadly disease was of great concern to their readers and listeners.
    An impromptu media briefing, the first on the
outbreak, was held at the WHO Beijing office
on Wednesday, 19 February. On that day, Mr
Schnur was frantically networking with disease-
surveillance staff, sending emails, and drafting
queries to the Ministry of Health for more
information. His receptionist alerted him that
about 15 reporters were refusing to leave the
reception area unless their questions were
answered. But without official information from Dr Henk Bekedam, WHO Representative in
                                                      China, speaks at a press briefing on 13 May
the Ministry of Health, there was little to add to in Beijing.
what the media already knew. The media were
already working hard gathering information from Beijing and the provinces
and in some cases they knew at least as much as the WHO staff did.
    Yet this first impromptu press briefing was followed by even more calls from
the media, encouraged perhaps by the quick and open response of the WHO
office, led by Dr Bekedam.
    After the rush of media interest, an office next to the WHO premises was
rented for press briefings. WHO staff expected about 30 journalists at the first
briefing, which took place before the WHO team visited Guangdong. After
entering the room, the team was shocked to see more than 130 people crammed
into the room, with journalists sitting on the floor with microphones just in
front of the head table. There were more than 25 cameras from all the major
news networks.


WHO        TEAMS OF EXPERTS INVESTIGATE THE                    GUANGDONG
OUTBREAK
   The first WHO team of influenza experts arrived in China on Sunday, 23
February. This small team, drawn from Japan, the United States of America, and
WHO, was very knowledgeable and had worked at length with respiratory
diseases and disease surveillance. While this team sought to find out more about
the disease in Guangdong, news of an outbreak in Viet Nam emerged.
   After the departure of this first team, the Ministry of Health agreed to have a
second group of experts visit Beijing and Guangdong and hold more detailed
discussions with the Ministry of Health and China CDC. WHO was markedly
increasingly its presence in China.

                                                                            SARS: How a global
                                                                           epidemic was stopped     77
                                                    In an unprecedented move that reflected its
                                                willingness to cooperate and the importance it
                                                gave to the work on SARS, the Government
                                                relaxed visa authorization procedures for the
                                                WHO experts. Normally it would have taken at
                                                least two weeks for the Government to issue a
                                                visa. Now visas became available at the airport
                                                on arrival. As the need for more experts grew,
                                                the Government started allowing the WHO
     Some members of the WHO team of experts in office to fax visa authorizations within hours of
     China (from left): Alan Schnur, Dr Robert  receiving résumés. Experts could be on the plane
     Breiman, and Dr Merion Evans.
                                                to Beijing only a day after the Ministry of Health
                                                came to know about them. This cooperation
             between WHO and Ministry of Health was unprecedented and reflected the
             very high level of attention given to work by the Government.
                 Meetings between the second team and Beijing municipal health authorities
             were not encouraging. The team found many gaps in the information. The members
             doubted that the surveillance system was up to the task and that the municipal
             government knew enough about the disease to mount an adequate response.
                 The work in Guangdong started slowly, but picked up after a few days.
             WHO had developed a good working relationship with provincial health officials
             when the international influenza team had visited in 1998.
                 Discussions with Guangdong health and hospital officials were open and
             frank. Public-health workers had shown themselves to be extremely capable
             and courageous in identifying and tackling the new disease. The guidelines
             they developed in early February accurately assigned the case definition and
             advocated correct infection-control measures. Only slight revisions were needed
             in early March to reflect the need to stop visits to suspected SARS patients.
             These guidelines, with an emphasis on infection control and quarantine, would
             need to be relearnt in Beijing from experience.
                 The WHO team, together with the Guangdong Health Bureau, offered to
             hold a briefing session with representatives of all international consulates in
             Guangzhou. The briefing generated intense media interest. The team members
             reported their findings, taking note of the speed, accuracy, and quality of the
             actions taken by the Guangdong health authorities to set up a sensitive
             surveillance system and an extremely strict infection-control regimen. It was
             the first time that Bureau officials had spoken with consular officials. Both sides
             agreed that it wouldn’t be the last.
                 After returning to Beijing, the WHO team visited many hospitals and districts
             from 11 to 15 April to see first-hand how things were. Far from being open and
             responsive, like their counterparts in Guangzhou, hospitals in Beijing were clearly
             withholding data, and some that were known to have SARS cases among their


      SARS: How a global
78    epidemic was stopped
staff denied having a problem. Recommendations made by the team following
the Guangdong visit were not yet being acted on in Beijing.


VIRUS     SPREADS TO       BEIJING
    SARS had gone international with the WHO
alerts of 12 and 15 March. The rest of the world
responded to a degree never before seen for
any health issue. China was still not releasing
information about the substantial efforts being
taken at the local level to control the new
disease. That did not stop the virus from gaining
hold in Beijing, where its impact would
eventually be the greatest. On 2 and 15 March,
two cases arrived in Beijing, both causing
super-spreading events.5
                                                   The chest X-ray of a patient showing symptoms
    The first case was Ms YM, a 27-year-old of SARS is examined in Xiaotangshan Hospital,
woman who sold jewellery at a rented counter Beijing.
in a department store in Taiyuan, the capital of Shanxi Province. She developed
symptoms on 22 February while on a business trip in Guangdong, and sought
medical attention on her return to Taiyuan the next day. When her condition
did not improve, she rented a car and drove to Beijing on 1 March. She was
admitted to a military hospital on 2 March and transferred to another military
hospital in the city on 5 March. Ms YM eventually recovered, but many of her
close contacts developed SARS, including eight family members and friends,
two doctors and a nurse in Taiyuan and at least 10 health workers at the two
hospitals in Beijing. Both her parents died.
    The second case was Mr LSK, a 72-year-old man from Beijing who was
infected while visiting ward 8A of Prince of Wales Hospital in Hong Kong. He
passed on the virus to at least 59 other people in Beijing after his arrival on
15 March (in addition to those infected on his flight, CA112 [see Chapter 15]).
    By April, SARS was well established in Beijing, but only a few cases were
being reported to WHO, even as the international media feasted on rumours of
overflowing hospital wards and hidden cases.
    On 9 April, a prominent surgeon and former director of a military hospital,
Dr Jiang Yanyong, caused a sensation in the foreign media when he disputed
the official count of 19 SARS patients. He cited at least 60 undisclosed cases in
military hospitals. On 23 April, WHO issued a travel advisory for Beijing, thereby
extending the travel advisory that was issued to Hong Kong and Guangdong on
2 April, and which would be extended to Tianjin and Inner Mongolia on 8 May.




                                                                             SARS: How a global
                                                                            epidemic was stopped   79
             WHO         TEAMS ASSESS THE          SARS      SITUATION IN        CHINA
                                                           WHO expressed doubts over China’s data,
                                                       noting that military hospitals were not linked
                                                       to the state medical system. “We have clearly
                                                       told the Government the international
                                                       community does not trust their figures,” Dr
                                                       Bekedam told a highly charged news
                                                       conference on 16 April. With the WHO team
                                                       that had visited Guangdong, he had just met
                                                       for the first time with Madame Wu Yi, the Vice-
     Dr Kajsa Giesecke, a member of the WHO team in
     Inner Mongolia, studies SARS reports with Dr Yang Premier, to talk about their findings. Although
     Qin in a hospital in Batou.                       generally satisfied with the control measures
              in Guangdong, Dr Bekedam and the team were concerned about Beijing’s
              inadequate surveillance, reporting, and infection-control measures, as well as
              the medical fees that might discourage SARS cases from seeking treatment.
                  The media focused on underreporting of cases. Pushed to give a more precise
              estimate of the number of cases in Beijing, Mr Schnur said that there were
              probably between 100 and 200 cases, compared with the 34 reported by the
              local authorities.
                  WHO teams led by experts from top public-health institutions would later
              visit several other provinces. In all, around 80 experts from around the world
              were flown into China to assist WHO in its work.
                  On 20 April 2003, in a watershed event, China declared war on SARS,
              deeming it a “top priority”. The country’s leaders called for an accurate account
              of the epidemic from all levels and issued a strong warning against hiding cases.
              Following this, 295 previously unreported SARS cases in Beijing were disclosed,
              bringing the city’s total to 339. Health Minister Zhang Wenkang and Beijing
              Mayor Meng Xuenong, both of whom were seen to have responded inadequately
              to SARS, were removed from their posts. Vice-Premier Wu, a highly respected
              woman in the Politburo, took charge of an ad hoc SARS committee.


             WAS THE         GENIE OUT OF THE BOTTLE?
                But while China’s leaders were now committed to battling SARS, the
             challenges ahead were enormous. China was short of data, capacity, resources—
             and time. The critical early period for containment, before April, had already
             passed. Experts feared it might be too late to put the brakes on SARS. By now
             the virus had crept into provinces with poor health infrastructures, such as Shanxi
             and Inner Mongolia. In Beijing, the numbers continued to climb. By early May,
             the city had over 2,000 cases, and 100 new cases were being reported daily.5
                Half the probable cases reported no contact with SARS patients or health
             workers. The experts were baffled. Was the infection coming from unrecognized


      SARS: How a global
80    epidemic was stopped
sources? Was there simply not enough time to look into contact histories? Or
had officials, not daring to underreport, simply reported as SARS cases many
that in fact were not? Control efforts, which used to be hampered by
underreporting, now staggered under the number of new cases.
    The May Day holiday threatened to shift the pace of the disease to a higher
gear. Many rural migrant workers—the “floating population” in cities—return
to their villages ahead of this holiday. There were fears that they would bring
home the virus.
    Could China cope? Hospitals lacked even
essential equipment such as masks and gloves
to undertake isolation needed for cases and
suspect cases. Public health had been
underfunded for years, as surveillance and
rural health care were shunted aside in favour
of revenue-earning services. SARS could
overwhelm areas such as the “poverty
province” of Guangxi, where most township
                                                   In Guangzhou, migrant workers are forced
clinics lack emergency medical supplies and by worries over SARS to wait outside the
basic laboratory equipment. Was the train station on 2 May before returning home
proverbial genie already out of the bottle? Was for the May Day holiday
it too late to vanquish the virus before it became endemic?
    There were two major concerns: did the hospitals have the capacity to treat
and isolate all the cases and suspect cases? And could the virus be prevented
from spreading out of the cities? To help address the first concern, a new
1,000 bed-hospital, built in a week in Xiaotangshan, Beijing, opened at the end
of April. Unlike most other hospitals, it met disease-control requirements, with
well-ventilated single rooms.
    In early May, as WHO staff visited the Ministry of Health to discuss joint
investigations in selected high-risk provinces, morale was at its lowest. The
Ministry shared its cafeteria with the hospital staff of the quarantined People’s
Hospital and it was feared that some of the Ministry staff could have been infected.
More than 100 new cases were still being reported daily; many provinces were
reporting cases.
    Some experts predicted the worst, and suggested that the best hope lay in
suppressing and minimizing the disease. But WHO refused to concede defeat,
reminding the world that other areas had contained and then eliminated their
outbreaks. And, after all, this was China, where mobilizing the masses was
something of an ancient art.


MOBILIZING        THE MASSES
   In Guangxi Province, minority groups sang folk songs on SARS. In Hohhot,
the capital of Inner Mongolia, huge wall murals showing aspects of the SARS


                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                       epidemic was stopped   81
               experience covered buildings in the city centre. In Beijing, revolutionary era-
               style banners spurred comrades on. On television, reports lauded the “white-
               coated warriors” and “angels in white”.
                   President Hu Jintao declared a “people’s war” against SARS. The Party’s
               propaganda department worked feverishly to make SARS known to China’s 1.3
               billion people.
                   A desert of information gave way to a deluge. Finnish journalist Pekka
               Mykkanen remarked after observing SARS propaganda in a few provinces: “Once,
               there was nothing on SARS. Now, there is nothing but SARS.”
                   From 30 April, people taking boats, buses, trains, and airplanes were having
               their temperature checked. As a result, after this date no exports of SARS virus
               between provinces was recorded. A WHO expert, Dr Sandy Cocksedge, helped
               develop and put in place the overall system for travel screening from the end of
               April. Unfortunately, these measures were not in place when about two million
               people left Beijing after the sacking of the Mayor.
                                                         In Beijing, authorities made good their
                                                      leaders’ pledge to act. They closed cinemas,
                                                      karaoke bars, libraries, Internet cafés, and
                                                      swimming pools, and quarantined entire
                                                      buildings, including three university apartments
                                                      and 27 SARS-designated hospitals. Schools were
                                                      shut, and an online study service was set up for
                                                      the 1.7 million students affected. As business
                                                      vanished, restaurants voluntarily closed. The city
     A health worker checks the temperature of
                                                      emptied in “the most spectacular of
     cyclists at a roadblock leading to a residential
     area in Beijing on 8 June 2003.                  disappearing acts,” said Time magazine.6 People
               stayed home, were quarantined, or tried to flee. Streets were empty, with traffic
               less than a quarter of the normal. Public life came to a standstill. And everywhere
               the smell of boiling vinegar pervaded.
                   In all, 30,000 people were quarantined in Beijing. Many more, perhaps as
               much as 20% to 30% of the population, isolated themselves. In Nanjing, 10,000
               were quarantined in one stroke. Elsewhere, entire villages were sealed. In
               Guangxi, mass gatherings of more than 50 people were banned.
                   For this people’s war, China developed “people’s surveillance”. Where China
               was lacking, it found ways to make do, using time-tested methods such as
               quarantine and thermometers. By mobilizing the entire population, China was
               able to rapidly identify the chains of transmission and isolate the cases. In this
               way, a situation that appeared to be rapidly growing out control was brought to
               heel within two months.




      SARS: How a global
82    epidemic was stopped
    Old traditions were revived. Grassroots party structures gained new vigour,
as people grew wary of outsiders. In Hebei, a province next to Beijing, villagers
set up roadblocks at commuter entrances, their mini Great Walls. Vehicle wheels
were sprayed with disinfectant, temperatures tested, and some cars turned back.
Visitors from Beijing were especially unwelcome.
    Other provinces also set up similar stop-spray-screen stations. Mr Mykkanen
came across 20 such SARS stations in a four-hour drive from Datong, Shanxi, to
Hohhot, Inner Mongolia. Yunnan Province even drove out tourists. Lijiang City
closed all hotels in popular tourist spots.
    Neighbourhood committees watched for SARS symptoms and returning
migrants. One volunteer observed 10 households. Any new returnees were
isolated for 15 days and had their temperature checked three times a day. Villagers
also checked on one another, scrutinizing travel movements and possible
symptoms.
    “It’s an intricate web of surveillance. It’s like a fishing net,” said Dr James
Maguire, a member of the WHO team that visited Hebei. “It uses the traditional
neighbourhood community unit so it is quite unique.”
    The impressive surveillance measures were matched by extreme measures
to control the spread of SARS. Not all of these were rational. Some provoked
fear. In Chagugang town, near the port of Tianjin, thousands rioted over plans
to convert a school into a SARS ward. Two buildings were ransacked.7
    Infection control was overdone at times. Procedures were unwieldy or
unsustainable. Hospital staff made up for the lack of correctly designed protective
gear by wearing whatever was available, in layers. In Guangxi, WHO experts
found staff wearing three layers of gowns, gloves, and multilayered masks. Such
clothing was oppressively hot—and unnecessary.
    Dozens of fever clinics for SARS patients that were organized within Beijing
hospitals were closed after reports of nosocomial infections. A study later found
that visitors to these fever clinics were at high risk of contracting SARS because
of inadequate separation of patients.8
    Joint WHO–Ministry of Health teams, in their visits to the provinces, noted
that cases were not widely dispersed and that the people had a remarkable level
of knowledge of the disease. In one village in Hebei Province, the people had
temporarily blocked a road to keep out visitors from Beijing. One of them said
she was watching a roadblock on a side street to prevent the spread of SARS.
Temperatures were being taken several times a day. Clearly, the nation was
responding.
    Slowly, the number of cases fell. By the second half of May, confidence was
growing that SARS would be contained. Early case detection through the




                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   83
             “people’s surveillance” and large-scale quarantine, isolation, and infection
             control at designated SARS hospitals contributed to ending the epidemic. WHO
             lifted its travel advisory on Hong Kong and Guangdong on 23 May, followed by
             Inner Mongolia, Shanxi, and Tianjin on 13 June. At a press conference on 24
             June, WHO lifted its travel advisory for Beijing and declared China SARS-free.


             OLD      LESSONS RELEARNT
                   SARS prompted the best and worst models of public-health responses, and
               exposed many of the weaknesses and strengths of the world’s most populous
               nation.
                   The disease put infectious diseases firmly back on China’s health agenda
               and highlighted critical cash-strapped areas of health provision. It served as a
               wake-up call. It demonstrated the need for a rapid-response capacity to combat
               changing disease situations. It showed how one nation’s weak response could
               endanger the world’s public-health security, and how a response drawing on
               unique local strengths—such as mass mobilization—could be effective.
                                                         China strengthened its disease-control
                                                      fundamentals. On 9 May 2003, the State
                                                      Council issued a new Regulation on Public
                                                      Health Emergency Response to strengthen
                                                      surveillance. The regulation covered future
                                                      new disease outbreaks and improved reporting
                                                      and response, including cooperation with
                                                      technical agencies. In August 2004, the
                                                      National Law on Communicable Diseases
                                                      Prevention and Control was revised. Both of
                                                      these changes were based on the experiences
     Dr Shigeru Omi (left), WHO Regional Director for and lessons learnt from SARS.
     the Western Pacific, shakes hands with Chinese      The serious effects of delaying or blocking
     Executive Vice Health Minister Gao Qiang after a
     press conference announcing the lifting of the   the  exchange of public and scientific
     travel advisory for Beijing, 24 June 2003.       information are evident: rumours and myths
               replace facts and science. And once credibility is damaged, trust takes a long
               time to return.
                   In a country with great disparities in health care, where extensive computed
               tomography (CT) scans can be found in areas of low immunization coverage,
               SARS was also a timely reminder of the need for equity in health care—and the
               value of simple strategies over high technology.
                   This new disease, which spread on the wings of modernization, was ultimately
               beaten by some of the simplest and oldest tools of public health: contact tracing,
               quarantine, and isolation.




      SARS: How a global
84    epidemic was stopped
REFERENCES
1
    Assessing the impact and costs of SARS in developing Asia. In: Asian
    Development Outlook 2003 Update. Manila, Asian Development Bank, 2003.
2
    Enserink M. SARS in China: China’s missed chance. Science, 2003, 301
    (5631):294–296.
3
    Zhong et al. Epidemiology and cause of severe acute respiratory syndrome
    (SARS) in Guangdong in February 2003. The Lancet, 25 October 2003,
    362(9393):1353–1358.
4
    Kong E. Two dead after boiling white vinegar. South China Morning Post, 13
    February 2003.
5
    Liang W et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome, Beijing, 2003. Emerging
    Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10(1):25–31.
6
    Beech H, Forney M. Control issues. Time Magazine, 5 May 2003.
7
    Mykkanen P, Eckholm E. Villagers in China riot over SARS. New York Times,
    29 April 2003.
8
    Wu J et al. Risk factors for SARS among persons without known contact with
    SARS patients, Beijing, China. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10(2):
    210–216.




                                                                   SARS: How a global
                                                                  epidemic was stopped   85
                 6 HONG KONG
               (CHINA): HOSPITALS
                  UNDER SIEGE


               Twenty buses wound out of Block E of the Amoy Gardens residential complex
            in Kowloon in the dead of night on 1 April 2003. Picked out by the cold, white
            glare of TV camera lights, the men, women and children inside stared back in
            fear above their surgical masks. For the people of Hong Kong (China), this almost
            Dantesque scene seemed to be proof that the SARS outbreak had entered a new
            and altogether more frightening phase.
               In fact, Amoy Gardens was to be the final big scare of the Hong Kong
            outbreak—but its effect was to linger for many months afterwards.
               The sudden appearance of the virus in a housing block, with no clear
            indication at first of how or why it had infected so many people, changed
            everything.
               From that day on, normal life in Hong Kong came to a standstill. People
            rarely ventured out of their homes without a mask. In a city where shopping is
            a mass activity, stores stood empty. Cinemas screened movies to nobody. And
            the normally bustling restaurants were silent.
               International visitors stopped arriving, especially after 2 April, when WHO
            advised against all but essential travel to the territory. One by one, the aircraft
            of Hong Kong’s No 1 airline, Cathay Pacific Airways, were mothballed at Chek
            Lap Kok airport. In the end, SARS cost Hong Kong billions of dollars in lost
            business, leaving the city teetering on the brink of its third recession in six years.
               The nightmare was to last until 23 June 2003, when, 20 days after the last
            case was isolated, the outbreak was declared over [Figure 6.1]. By then the
            virus had infected 1,755 people, 299 of whom died. Health workers accounted
            for 386 cases (22% of the total). Four doctors, two health-care assistants, a
            nurse, and a ward attendant died.1




     SARS: How a global
86   epidemic was stopped
                        Figure 6.1 Hong Kong epidemic curve




  Source: Data reported to WHO


OUTBREAK          AT   PRINCE     OF   WALES HOSPITAL
    Before the Amoy Gardens outbreak, most SARS cases in Hong Kong had
been limited to hospital settings. The first hospital to feel the full impact of the
mysterious new virus from China had been the Prince of Wales. What happened
there was the start of a crisis that would push Hong Kong’s health-care system to
the limit and make heroes of front-line hospital workers.
    On 10 March 2003, seven doctors and four
nurses from ward 8A of the Prince of Wales
Hospital called in sick. Accounts of the cluster
of infections appeared in a few Hong Kong
Chinese newspapers the next day. Alerted by
these reports, the Department of Health
announced on 11 March that it was
investigating hospital staff members who had
developed “fever and upper respiratory
infection”.2 The cases were reported to WHO. Staff at the Prince of Wales Hospital in Hong Kong
                                                    wear face masks in an effort to protect themselves
By the end of the day, 50 staff were on sick from SARS.
leave. All were recalled for medical
examination; 23 were hospitalized and isolated.1




                                                                                 SARS: How a global
                                                                                epidemic was stopped     87
                By 12 March, a preliminary investigation suggested an infection that was
            transmitted through droplets and fomites (materials contaminated with body
            secretions) with an incubation period of one to seven days.1 The investigators
            used a case definition of fever and chills.
                The index case was Mr CT, a Hong Kong resident who had visited a friend
            from San Francisco staying in room 906 at the Metropole Hotel from 18 to
            23 February. To reach his friend’s room, Mr CT had to walk past room 911,
            where Professor LJL, who had brought the virus from Guangdong, stayed on
            21 February. Fever, chills, and rigors starting on 24 February pushed Mr CT to
            seek medical help at the Prince of Wales accident and emergency department
            on 28 February.
                He returned four days later and was admitted to ward 8A with pneumonia.
            But his illness was not severe enough to trigger infection-control procedures or
            to prompt reporting to the Department of Health, which had instituted enhanced
            surveillance for severe community-acquired pneumonia on 12 February,
            following news of the Guangdong outbreak. Only on 13 March, when he was
            suspected of being the index case of the outbreak, was Mr CT isolated. By then
            his condition was already improving. The next day he was confirmed as the
            index case.1
                SARS was subsequently diagnosed in 143 of Mr CT’s contacts: 50 health
            workers, 17 medical students, 30 patients in ward 8A, 42 visitors to the ward,
            and four relatives who visited Mr CT in the ward.1 One other person infected
            with SARS was not included in the tally, as his infection was diagnosed in Beijing:
            Mr LSK, the index case on flight CA112 [see Chapter 15].
                Prince of Wales doctors attributed the super-spreading event involving Mr
            CT to failure to apply proper isolation precautions and use of a nebulized
            bronchodilator.3 In all, 239 people fell ill sometime between 5 and 31 March
            during the Prince of Wales outbreak.


            A HEALTH SYSTEM UNDER THREAT
                Even as the Prince of Wales Hospital was grappling with the mystery outbreak
            among its health-care workers, other hospitals were fighting smaller fires.1
                A sister-in-law of Mr CT developed symptoms on 10 March and was admitted
            to the private Baptist Hospital on 13 March. She stayed in two wards before
            being transferred to a public hospital. Four health workers from these wards
            became sick, and the hospital notified the Department of Health of the outbreak
            on 21 March. Contact tracing and medical surveillance eventually uncovered
            25 transmissions in the Baptist Hospital: 10 hospital staff members, 11 patients
            (in the two wards), three visitors, and a visiting doctor. The visiting doctor passed
            on the virus to his wife and two of his patients. Five household contacts of the
            affected patients were also infected.



     SARS: How a global
88   epidemic was stopped
    On 2 March, a 72-year-old Canadian tourist
was admitted to the private St Paul’s Hospital.
He was infected during his stay in room 902
of the Metropole Hotel and passed on the virus
to three health workers, five visitors, and one
patient at St Paul’s. Two family contacts of these
cases were also infected. When the Canadian’s
condition worsened, he was transferred on 8
March to the intensive care unit of Queen Mary
                                                     Fifty health workers, all contacts of the index
Hospital. As a result of adequate infection- case, fell ill during the Prince of Wales outbreak.
control practices, no further transmissions were
recorded.
    A frequent traveller to Guangzhou was admitted to Queen Elizabeth Hospital
on 9 March and died from SARS on 30 March. A doctor and two nurses at the
hospital developed pneumonia between 12 and 16 March. The wife of the
index case and a relative of the patient in the next bed were also infected.
    On 13 March, Pamela Youde Nethersole Eastern Hospital reported six health
workers with atypical pneumonia to the Department of Health. The infection
was traced to a middle-aged man who travelled frequently to southern China.
After a trip to Zhongshan, Guangdong, on 22–23 February, he was admitted to
the hospital on 2 March and died on 16 March. The outbreak affected 14 people:
the index case, seven health workers, one patient, one visitor, and four close
contacts of the affected health workers.
    Patients who were not suspected of having SARS but were eventually found
to have the disease sparked outbreaks in seven other hospitals. At Alice Ho Miu
Ling Nethersole Hospital, 40 staff members, 75 patients, 17 visitors, and 24
close contacts were affected. Most hospital workers got the disease through
direct contact with SARS patients in general wards who had unsuspected
infection. At the time of contact, all hospital workers had used masks but not
necessarily other protective devices.4 The families of the affected hospital workers
were not infected.
    SARS patients also caused an outbreak, reported on 2 April, in the United
Christian Hospital. Three patients with non-SARS diagnoses (including two
residents of Amoy Gardens) were eventually identified as the cause. The outbreak
affected 26 staff members, only five of whom worked in SARS wards. A distraught
caller told a local radio show on 4 April that her son who worked at United
Christian Hospital did not dare go home for fear of infecting his family. “I do
not even know where he is,” said the sobbing woman.5




                                                                               SARS: How a global
                                                                              epidemic was stopped     89
            sars-DESIGNATED          HOSPITAL
                Princess Margaret Hospital, a 1,200-bed acute hospital serving 1.5 million
            people, was the only Hong Kong hospital with dedicated facilities for infectious
            disease (four isolation wards with 86 beds). On 26 March, it was chosen to be a
            designated hospital for SARS cases. At that time, it had been managing about
            100 SARS patients but none of its staff had been infected.
                To allow the hospital to focus on SARS cases, all the other patients were
            transferred to other hospitals from 29 March, and the accident and emergency
            department was closed. To become the SARS-designated hospital at the time of
            the Amoy Gardens outbreak was unfortunate timing for the Princess Margaret.
                The hospital admitted 93 SARS transfers from other hospitals on 29 March.
            By the end of the week, 555 had been admitted, many of them from Amoy
            Gardens. The hospital was overwhelmed not only by the number of new patients
            but also by the critical condition of many of them.
                The 593 cases treated at the Princess Margaret Hospital made up 34% of all
            SARS cases in Hong Kong—more than the number treated in any other hospital.
            Although the hospital managed at first to avoid infections among its staff, the
            outbreak took a heavy toll. A core team of intensive-care-unit doctors and nurses
            were infected in the first week of April. On 7 April alone, 12 Princess Margaret
            staff developed SARS. In total, 62 members of the staff were infected, 25 in the
            intensive care unit. This represented 16% of the total of 386 health workers
            who were infected with SARS during the outbreak.6


            LEGAL BASE STRENGTHENED
                The Quarantine and Prevention of Disease Ordinance, which was first
            enacted in 1936, had been revised from time to time. On 27 March 2003, the
            Director of Health added SARS to the list of infectious diseases, making it the
            28th infectious disease listed, in addition to three “special” diseases—plague,
            yellow fever, and cholera. Medical practitioners were required to notify the
            Department of Health if they had reason to suspect the existence of SARS.
                SARS was included in the ordinanace mainly to provide the legal basis to
            require all close contacts of SARS patients to report daily for up to 10 days to
            one of four designated medical centres. Contacts had to stay home and not go
            to work or school. The designated medical centres started operating from
            31 March.
                The move was a tough choice, acknowledged the Secretary for Health,
            Welfare and Food, Dr Yeoh Eng-kiong. “The ordinance [had] not been invoked
            for decades. And, internationally, it has rarely been invoked because everyone
            is worried that it may backfire.”7 Draconian measures such as compulsory
            quarantine were deliberately avoided initially because of concerns about driving
            SARS patients into hiding, issues of civil liberty and public acceptability, and
            uncertainty about effectiveness and the feasibility of enforcement.

     SARS: How a global
90   epidemic was stopped
   The ordinance was later used to enable the quarantine of the residents of
Block E, Amoy Gardens, on 31 March, and the evacuation of the block on
1 April, as evidence increasingly pointed to an environmental source for the
virus [see Chapter 16]. On 17 April, the legislation was further amended to
provide for temperature checks of travellers and to prevent SARS contacts from
leaving Hong Kong.


TRACING HOUSEHOLDS BY ELECTRONIC MEANS
   In the Amoy Gardens outbreak, the police were called in to trace households
that had moved out of Block E before the isolation order on 31 March. By
4 April, the police had tracked down 55 of those 113 families.
   On 6 April, the police began using its sophisticated Major Incident
Investigation and Disaster Support System (MIIDSS) to assist the Department of
Health in epidemiological investigations. The system allowed SARS investigators
to validate addresses, map out their geographical distribution, reveal potential
sources or routes of virus transmission, and show the connection between cases
and contacts. By 7 April, the police said they had contacted all the other
58 families that had moved out of Block E.
   Separately, the unprecedented speed and volume of cases swamped the
paper-based disease-reporting system. The problem was resolved, under the
leadership of Dr Yeoh, with the launch on 8 April of an electronic database
(e-SARS) that enabled the Department of Health and the Hospital Authority to
share and exchange information in real time. The collaborative application of
e-SARS and MIIDSS significantly enhanced the swiftness and capacity of case
investigation and contact tracing, thus reducing further spread of infection.


A REVIEW      OF THE     GOVERNMENT’S HANDLING OF sars
   To review how well the Government,
including the Hospital Authority, had
managed and controlled the outbreak, Chief
Executive Tung Chee-hwa convened a SARS
Expert Committee, composed of 11
international and local experts. The
committee, reporting on 2 October 2003,
declared that “overall, the epidemic in Hong
Kong was handled well, although there were
clearly significant shortcomings of system      Former Director of Health, Dr Margaret Chan

performance during the early days of the epidemic when little was known about
the disease or its cause. … The committee has not found any individual deemed
to be culpable of negligence, lack of diligence or maladministration.”1




                                                                           SARS: How a global
                                                                          epidemic was stopped   91
                                                       The committee also issued 46
                                                    recommendations to prepare the territory
                                                    against a future outbreak. As a result, infection-
                                                    control training for health-care workers was
                                                    stepped up; a Centre for Health Protection
                                                    (under the Department of Health) opened on
                                                    1 June 2004 to better focus on emergency
                                                    preparedness; 1,400 isolation beds were made
                                                    available in 14 public hospitals; and funds
     Former Secretary for Health, Welfare and Food,
     Dr Yeoh Eng-kiong                              were sought for a new infectious disease
                                                    centre at the Princess Margaret Hospital.
                  A separate review panel formed by the Hospital Authority to review the
              performance of the public hospital system during the crisis released its report to
              the public on 16 October 2003. The report did not seek to apportion blame but
              to make recommendations for future outbreaks. “We have emphasized the need
              for a strong and immediate response during crisis,” the report stated. “Strong
              leadership and effective communication are essential.”6
                  A third report, by a Legislative Council Select Committee, released on 5 July
              2004,8 was highly critical of the Government’s response. In the end, the Secretary
              for Health, Welfare and Food and the Chairman of the Hospital Authority, Dr
              Leong Che-hong, resigned.


             PAINFUL LESSONS LEARNT
                  SARS took Hong Kong, and indeed the world, by storm. When it struck
              Hong Kong in March 2003, little was known about the disease. The magnitude
              of the outbreak, the nonspecific nature of the symptoms, the lack of a quick
              diagnostic test for the syndrome, and the speed with which workload and cases
              increased had all contributed to the problems in managing the outbreak.
                                                        In the words of Dr David Heymann,
                                                    Executive Director for Communicable Diseases
                                                    of WHO at the time of the outbreak, Hong
                                                    Kong’s efforts to stem the spread of SARS were
                                                    nothing less than “heroic”. And Dr Jeffrey
                                                    Koplan, former director of the American CDC,
                                                    likened Hong Kong’s well-established public-
                                                    health system to a dam protecting its people
                                                    from floods. For 50 years, it worked well.
     A Hong Kong resident wearing a mask walks past However, an unprecedented massive flood
     a newspaper sign quoting WHO as saying the     struck and the wall was found to be deficient;
     worst of the SARS virus is over.
                                                    a higher wall had to be built. Hong Kong learnt
              painful lessons in the SARS epidemic and began taking proactive measures to
              strengthen the preparedness of its health system for public-health emergencies.


      SARS: How a global
92    epidemic was stopped
REFERENCES
1
    SARS in Hong Kong: from Experience to Action. Report of the SARS Expert
    Committee, October 2003.
2
    DH concerned about PWH Case. Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
    of the People’s Republic of China, Government Information Centre, 11 March
    2003 (http://www.info.gov.hk/gia/general/200303/11/0311214.htm, accessed
    1 April 2005).
3
    Wong R, Hui D. Index patient and SARS outbreak in Hong Kong. Emerging
    Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10(2):339-341.
4
    Ho AS, Sung JJY, Chan-Yeung M. An outbreak of severe acute respiratory
    syndrome among hospital workers in a community hospital in Hong Kong.
    Annals of Internal Medicine, 2003, 139(7):564–567.
5
    Reuters Health. Hong Kong police launch SARS manhunt, 4 April 2003.
6
    Report of the Hospital Authority Review Panel on the SARS Outbreak. Hong
    Kong (China), Hospital Authority, September 2003.
7
    Press conference on the latest measures to contain the spread of atypical
    pneumonia. Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic
    of China, Government Information Centre, 27 March 2003 (http://
    www.info.gov.hk/webbroadcast/pres279e.html, accessed 1 April 2005).
8
    Report of the Legislative Council Select Committee to inquire into the handling
    of the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome outbreak by the Government and
    the Hospital Authority, July 2004. Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
    of the People’s Republic of China, Legislative Council, 2004
    (http://www.legco.gov.hk/yr03-04/english/sc/sc_sars/reports/sars_rpt.htm,
    accessed 1 April 2005).




                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                       epidemic was stopped   93
              7 VIET NAM: TOUGH
              DECISIONS PAY OFF


            FIRST ALERT
                “There is something strange going on, but I am not sure exactly what it is,”
            Dr Carlo Urbani, WHO’s communicable disease specialist in Viet Nam, said on
            Monday, 3 March 2003. He had just been to the Hanoi-French Hospital and
            was telling WHO Representative Pascale Brudon about Mr JC, an American
            businessman who had recently arrived from Hong Kong (China) with atypical
            pneumonia.
                By Wednesday afternoon, when four hospital staff were hospitalized and
            two more fell ill, it was clear that something was indeed happening. By the end
            of the day, seven hospital staff had been hospitalized. All of them had been in
            close contact with Mr JC.
                An event of major public-health importance was definitely unfolding. Dr
            Urbani pressed for a reorganization of the Hanoi-French Hospital, and
            particularly for stronger infection controls. “But everything was very chaotic at
            that time,” Ms Brudon recalled. “From the very start there was a sense of urgency.
            As soon as we heard about the first cases we informed the Ministry of Health. I
            also called the hospital’s manager, who was then in France, to return to Viet
            Nam and deal with the impending crisis.”


            URGENT ACTION URGED
               On Friday, 7 March, the situation was becoming more alarming, but there
            had been no response from the hospital management or the Ministry. Relying
            on a false-positive result, both believed that Mr JC was suffering from influenza B.
            Ms Brudon wrote to the Ministry of Health urging action to address this “potential
            public-health concern and international health hazard”. She offered WHO’s
            technical assistance and requested a speedier visa approval process for
            international experts. She also wrote to the manager of the Hanoi-French
            Hospital to emphasize the seriousness of the situation and the need to strengthen
            infection control. She recommended that all other patients be discharged or
            transferred, and that entry to the hospital be strictly limited to reduce the risk of
            exposure.


     SARS: How a global
94   epidemic was stopped
    Twelve people had now been hospitalized
in the Hanoi-French Hospital and many more
were falling sick, adding a greater sense of
urgency. “You absolutely must arrange a
meeting with the Ministry of Health this
weekend,” Dr Urbani told Ms Brudon. The
virus—or whatever it was—was spreading at
such dramatic speed, he said, that no time
could be lost.
    A 9 a.m. meeting with the Vice-Minister of
Health on Sunday, 9 March, would prove to Drs Mary Reynolds and Tim Uyeki, influenza
                                                    experts from the CDC, in front of the Hanoi-French
be decisive. Dr Urbani and Ms Brudon argued Hospital.
at length for immediate action against the
dangerous and contagious new illness. Eventually, the Vice-Minister was
convinced. He assigned a local team to review the situation at the Hanoi-French
Hospital that same day. The key decision was agreeing to bring in experts to
help investigate and control the outbreak. Dr Hitoshi Oshitani, WHO’s Regional
Adviser for Communicable Disease Surveillance and Response, arrived on
10 March to head the WHO team. Dr Tim Uyeki, an influenza expert from the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), United States of America,
flew in on 11 March.
    WHO held an emergency meeting with the Vice-Minister of Health and the
director of the National Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology on 12 March.
Drs Oshitani and Uyeki called the situation grave and, with support from
Ms Brudon, explained why. Dr Uyeki, the influenza expert, said that a new
pathogen, and not influenza, was the probable cause.
    These conclusions, according to Dr Uyeki, were based on the preliminary
epidemiology, clinical features, and estimated incubation period of the early
Hanoi cases—information provided by Dr Urbani. “He is the hero of SARS for
describing these so meticulously, for trying to implement control measures, and
for notifying the world about the outbreak. Everyone else contributed to what
Dr Urbani started,” Dr Uyeki later said. Dr Uyeki recommended immediate
implementation of control measures to prevent further transmission in hospital
and surveillance for new cases, including contact tracing.
    Dr Oshitani offered the help of WHO reference laboratories in providing
the required laboratory confirmation. This was a public-health problem of
regional and global significance, he said. The Ministry of Health should therefore
take over the control and management of the Hanoi-French Hospital and draw
on international assistance in carrying out research on the disease and the clinical
management of hospitalized cases. The Vice-Minister agreed to most of the
recommendations of the WHO team, but balked at the suggested takeover of
the Hanoi-French Hospital because it was a private hospital.


                                                                                 SARS: How a global
                                                                                epidemic was stopped     95
             URGENT ACTION IMPLEMENTED
                  As WHO had recommended, the Hanoi-French Hospital discharged all its
              other patients on 12 March and stopped admitting new patients other than staff
              members who were believed to be infected. All other suspected cases were
              thereafter admitted to special wards at the National Institute for Clinical Research
              in Tropical Medicine at Bach Mai Hospital. Urgent technical issues—case
              definition, case management, and treatment guidelines—were discussed in a
              telephone conference with WHO Headquarters in Geneva. On 14 March, the
              Prime Minister, who had been informed about the evolving situation, responded
              by creating an interministerial steering committee. The Ministry of Health had
              agreed to WHO’s suggestion and formed a Task Force the day before to manage
              the outbreak.
                  As soon as the WHO office in Viet Nam had an agreed strategy, Dr Oshitani
              returned to Manila to manage the regional response. On 16 March,
              Professor Aileen Plant took over as WHO team leader for the next 11 weeks. By
              then, a nine-person international team to help investigate and control the
              outbreak was in place at the WHO Viet Nam office. In all, 25 international
              experts and six local staff members would join the WHO SARS team in Viet Nam.
                                                     Professor Plant quickly divided the team
                                                 into groups looking after tasks such as
                                                 epidemiology,         rumour       surveillance,
                                                 laboratory testing, infection control and
                                                 contact tracing, always working with
                                                 counterparts in the Ministry of Health. She
                                                 recalled, “The team [was] extraordinary—[the
                                                 members] did whatever was asked of them,
                                                 whenever it needed to be done. For instance
                                                 one team member had been married only
     CDC epidemiologist Dr Sharon Bloom (second  three weeks and left her husband; one had a
     from left) conducts a serosurvey in Hanoi’s
                                                 gravely ill wife that he left behind. Everywhere
     Bach Mai Hospital.
                                                 people did whatever they could. The nurses
              and doctors at the French Hospital were just amazing; we will never know what
              they went through. Imagine going to work each day, watching your colleagues
              get ill and die with a new disease, and at the same time [feeling] the [diseases]
              beginning … in [you]—it is just un-imaginable. Yet, to my knowledge, not one
              doctor, not one nurse, in Viet Nam refused to look after people with SARS.”




      SARS: How a global
96    epidemic was stopped
                        Figure 7.1 Viet Nam epidemic curve




Source: Data reported to WHO


DEALING        WITH RUMOURS AND AIR TRAVEL
    To combat SARS, Viet Nam also had to combat rumours. The local WHO
office had to contend with intense pressure not only from the local and
international press but also from a very worried international community. A
call from Ho Chi Minh City reporting a suspicious illness and fever in an American
child roused Ms Brudon from sleep early in the morning of 18 March. It later
proved to be a false alarm. Still, WHO team members had to be sent hurriedly
to Ho Chi Minh City, and the child had to be evacuated to Taiwan, China, at a
time when charter airlines were not keen to perform such a service, even for
non-SARS cases.
    On 15 March, in an effort to avert the spread of the disease through
international travel, Ms Brudon sought to have a public announcement aired
on all flights out of Viet Nam. The message would describe the SARS symptoms
and advise any passengers with those symptoms to notify the medical authorities.
The managers of the international airlines swiftly shot down the request. “They
couldn’t read a notice like that on flights,” Ms Brudon recalls being told. “People
would be terrified.” But after some discussion, airlines allowed the distribution
of pamphlets in English, French, and Vietnamese describing the symptoms and
the ongoing outbreak in Hanoi. Once the airport authorities knew what to look
for, they were able to help screen passengers. A doctor from the Hanoi-French
Hospital who was unwell was stopped from boarding his international flight.
He was later found to have SARS. Soon after on the same day, WHO
Headquarters issued its travel advisory as evidence mounted that the disease

                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   97
                was spreading by air travel along international routes. Another doctor, who had
                also been infected at the Hanoi-French Hospital, wasn’t stopped. He boarded
                flight AF171 on 22 March to Paris even though he was already unwell [see
                Chapter 15]. Two passengers on that flight were infected, as was the manager of
                the hotel in Hanoi where the doctor had stayed.1
                    A tragic incident around that time was a grim reminder of the risk of
                international travel. On 11 March, Dr Urbani called Ms Brudon from Hanoi
                airport on his way to a conference in Bangkok that had been planned for months.
                “He said he didn’t feel well, and at first, I didn’t think much of it,” she told
                others later. “I told him to go, that we could handle things in Viet Nam without
                him.” Then remembering that Dr Urbani had been shivering when they had last
                met in her office, she called Dr Brian Doberstyn, Director of Communicable
                Disease Control at WHO’s Manila office. “I told him I thought Carlo might be
                sick,” she said. As the two decided, Dr Urbani was met at the Bangkok airport
                and, because he had symptoms, was quickly isolated at a hospital. Less than
                three weeks later, on 29 March 2003, the doctor who first alerted the world to
                the existence of SARS died of the very disease he had helped to identify. His
                death, just when the Viet Nam office was working overtime to contain the
                outbreak, was a harsh blow for WHO. “We were all working insanely to try and
                stop SARS,” said Ms Brudon. “And when Carlo died, it made the fight even
                more difficult.” It was inspiring, however, to see the WHO office overflowing
                with beautiful flowers as locals and foreigners mourned Dr Urbani.
                    But Dr Urbani’s efforts were paying off. The outbreak appeared to be coming
                to an end without spreading to the community. Strengthening infection control
                at Bach Mai Hospital became a high priority. When infection-control experts
                from Médecins Sans Frontières joined the WHO team, they were assigned to
                work with the hospital staff to ensure that internationally agreed protocols were
                understood and followed.
                                                            Before Viet Nam could declare the
                                                        outbreak ended, however, rumours of a
                                                        cluster of cases in Ninh Binh Province, about
                                                        90 kilometres south-east of Hanoi, were
                                                        received at the start of April. A new case found
                                                        in the province on 3 April was linked to the
                                                        Hanoi-French Hospital. Six other people in
                                                        the cluster were infected, but these were the
                                                        last transmissions in Viet Nam. Prompt action
                                                        had limited the outbreak in the country to
     CDC epidemiologist Dr Joel Montgomery conducts     only 63 people, most of these falling ill in the
     a training course on personal protective equipment
     in Ninh Binh Province.                             early days when tighter infection controls and
                                                        surveillance still had to be set up.




      SARS: How a global
98    epidemic was stopped
FIRST    COUNTRY TO INTERRUPT TRANSMISSION
   On 28 April 2003, about two months after its first case was recorded and
20 days after its last case, Viet Nam became the first country with an outbreak
to be removed from the WHO list of areas with recent transmission of SARS.
WHO and the Ministry of Health hosted a dinner to celebrate the occasion. “It
was a very big day for us,” Ms Brudon said, adding that, amid the toasts, there
was awareness of the continued need for surveillance. “Even as we were drinking
champagne, we were still looking for rumours. We weren’t exactly nervous,
but we couldn’t let our guard down just yet.” But the SARS outbreak in Viet Nam
had indeed been successfully contained, and no further cases were detected.
Said an exultant Ms Brudon, “It was a triumph both for WHO and for Viet Nam.”


WHY      THE SUCCESS?
    So why was Viet Nam able to control SARS? The early alert and actions of
Dr Urbani were clearly vital. So was Viet Nam’s willingness to address the
outbreak rapidly and vigorously. In a collaboration based on trust, the
Vietnamese Government made hard choices and made them quickly, following
the advice of WHO and its team of international experts in Hanoi.
    One of the earliest measures had been to
set up a high-level SARS Task Force within
the Ministry of Health, which met every day,
and a national intersectoral Steering
Committee for SARS Control. A special budget
was allocated to the Ministry of Health for
supplies, training and support for health staff
working with SARS patients.
    The Government also designated hospitals
for suspected SARS cases and strengthened Nurses from the Institute of Tropical Diseases hold
infection-control measures. It set up flowers at a ceremony on 2 May 2003 marking the
                                                release of the last SARS patients from the institute
quarantine areas and isolation rooms at border in Hanoi.
crossings, airports, and seaports. Provincial
governments were alerted in early March, at which time provincial steering
committees for SARS control were created, local medical staff were trained,
and guidelines were issued. Public-information campaigns helped prevent panic
in the population.
    “Immediate political commitment and leadership at the highest level were
vital,” said Ms Brudon. “A developing country—hit by an especially severe
outbreak—can triumph over a disease when reporting is prompt and open,
when WHO assistance is quickly requested and fully supported, and when rapid
case detection, immediate isolation, infection control, and vigorous contact
tracing are put in place.”


                                                                              SARS: How a global
                                                                             epidemic was stopped      99
                                                            In the final analysis, perhaps the most
                                                        important factor was luck. There was only one
                                                        super-spreading event—the index case.
                                                        Dr Urbani’s alert may have made infection
                                                        control for all subsequent cases much more
                                                        effective, as some would argue, but infection
                                                        control was never perfect, perhaps just good
                                                        enough, and luck kept the lapses from leading
                                                        to further spread. As the experience in other
                                                        countries showed, super-spreading events
      Vietnamese Health Minister Tran Thi Trung Chien   could quickly arise from cases that were
      (left) presents to WHO Representative Pascale
                                                        missed. Nevertheless, rapid recognition of the
      Brudon the Vietnamese president’s “Order of
      Friendship”, posthumously awarded to Dr Carlo     outbreak and rapid implementation of control
      Urbani at a ceremony on 9 May 2003 in Hanoi. The  measures were exactly what were needed.
      “Medal for People’s Health” was awarded to
      Dr Urbani, Ms Brudon, and Professor Aileen Plant.     But the last word on the outbreak must be
                                                        reserved for Dr Carlo Urbani. He did what
                was needed, knowing he was risking his life to save others. Recognizing his
                contribution to the world and Viet Nam in the control of SARS, the Vietnamese
                Government posthumously awarded Dr Urbani the Medal for People’s Health,
                as well as the Order of Friendship, the highest honour given to foreigners.



              REFERENCES
              1
                  Desenclos JC et al. Introduction of SARS in France, March–April, 2003.
                  Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10(2):195–200.




       SARS: How a global
100    epidemic was stopped
8 SINGAPORE: WAVES
 OF TRANSMISSION


    Picture this scene from a horror movie. The monster has been slain after an
epic struggle. But just as the heroes exhale deeply and savour their victory, the
monster rises again, changed but undefeated. Fighting SARS in Singapore was
like being in one of those horror movies.
    Recurrent waves of virus transmission, each with a new type of super-spreading
event, alternated with rapid, heroic attempts by the Ministry of Health, the
Government as a whole, and the people to halt further transmission. The fact
that only five patients accounted for 103 of the 205 probable SARS cases in
Singapore,1 and that the vast majority of patients infected no one else, showed
how devastating super-spreading events could be.2


INDEX CASES
   As in other places outside China with substantial local outbreaks, individuals
who had stayed at the Metropole Hotel [see Chapter 14] imported the first cases
of SARS into Singapore. Shortly after returning to Singapore, three persons with
pneumonia were admitted to hospital from 1 to 3 March. The Ministry of Health
was notified of these cases on 6 March, and advised immediate isolation.3 Until
then, they had been nursed in an open ward, without barrier infection-control
measures.4 One of them, 22-year-old Ms EM, went on to seed an outbreak at
Tan Tock Seng Hospital, with 22 of her contacts developing SARS.
   The Ministry of Health kept in close contact with WHO about early cases,
and immediately advised the body that a Singaporean physician who had treated
the cases at Tan Tock Seng Hospital was boarding a plane in New York, bound
for Frankfurt, Germany, with symptoms [see 15 March in Chapter 1]. This
information was a key piece in the puzzle that led WHO to issue an
unprecedented second global alert, only three days after the first.


INITIAL   CONTROL MEASURES
   To show how seriously they took the emerging threat, the Ministry of Health
and the Government quickly responded with a comprehensive set of measures
to contain the outbreak.

                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   101
                   • Cases were identified early, and isolated promptly at Tan Tock Seng Hospital.
                   • Hospitals improved their infection controls. They limited visitors, screened
                     patients in the emergency department, and made efforts to locate surplus
                     isolation beds in anticipation of a wider outbreak.
                   • Contacts and sources of identified cases were traced.
                   • Travel to places with SARS outbreaks was discouraged.
                   • Campaigns were launched to educate and inform the public. The
                     Government issued regular press releases and held press conferences (often
                     daily) chaired by Health Minister Lim Hng Kiang.
                   • Ministerial and bureaucratic task forces were formed to respond to the
                     growing threat.
                   • The Infectious Diseases Act was amended to allow the Government to
                     compel contacts of suspected SARS cases to be quarantined at home, and
                     provide for fines for those who refused to comply.


               FIRST     THREE WAVES OF SPREAD
                                                                    Despite these early measures, the
                                                                SARS virus would not be so easily
                                                                contained. One reason was the extent to
                                                                which the virus had already spread, with
                                                                many episodes of transmission by
                                                                12 March 2003, when WHO issued its
                                                                first alert. By this date, this first wave of
                                                                secondary cases already had symptoms,
                                                                the virus had spread to the next wave of
                                                                cases, and the third wave had started.
      A hospital staff member cares for a suspected SARS victim     The second wave of spread was mostly
      at Tan Tock Seng Hospital in Singapore.
                                                                from Ms AB, a 27-year-old Filipino nurse
                who was infected while caring for Ms EM at Tan Tock Seng Hospital. Ms AB was
                admitted to Tan Tock Seng Hospital on 10 March and isolated three days later.
                Twenty-two of her contacts in the ward (staff members, visitors, and other patients)
                were infected during those three days. Her husband may have been infected
                before she was admitted. One of the other patients infected was 53-year-old Ms
                PA, with diabetes and Gram-negative sepsis, who was admitted on the same
                day as Ms AB. She developed respiratory symptoms, and on 12 March she was
                transferred to the coronary care unit (CCU) as her symptoms were initially thought
                to be due to heart failure. Her presence in CCU resulted in a new round of virus
                transmission.




        SARS: How a global
102     epidemic was stopped
                        Figure 8.1 Singapore epidemic curve




 Source: Data reported to WHO


    These three generations of spread were confined to Tan Tock Seng Hospital
and close contacts of cases. With effective hospital infection control in case
treatment and follow-up of contacts, the Singapore outbreak was slowing down
towards the end of March. There were no more episodes of hospital transmission
in Tan Tock Seng Hospital, and no more cases were appearing in the community.


SPREAD       FROM ATYPICAL CASES
    But just when it seemed the outbreak was about to end, two patients who
were infected at Tan Tock Seng Hospital, but missed because of atypical
symptoms, were spreading the virus in the community and at other hospitals.
The first was a 90-year-old resident of Orange Valley Nursing Home with multiple
medical conditions.5 She had been admitted to the Tan Tock Seng Hospital
geriatric department on 7 March 2003 with pneumonia and urinary tract
infection. She improved with antibiotics and was returned to the nursing home
on 20 March, free of fever. In the following days, her breathing became
progressively more laboured, and she was admitted on 25 March to Changi
General Hospital, where she died on 30 March. Seven secondary cases, all in
exposed family members and health-care workers at the nursing home and
Changi General Hospital, were identified the week after.




                                                                     SARS: How a global
                                                                    epidemic was stopped   103
                The second cluster of cases to emerge from Tan Tock Seng Hospital would
             have more dramatic implications. Mr TKC, a 59-year-old man with multiple
             medical conditions (including ischemic heart disease with atrial fibrillation, a
             previous stroke with epilepsy, diabetes mellitus with kidney damage, and
             peripheral vascular disease) was treated as an in-patient at Tan Tock Seng Hospital
             from 5 to 20 March for diabetic kidney disease.6 On 24 March he presented to
             Singapore General Hospital with gastrointestinal bleeding and a low-grade fever.
             Since his chest X-rays were normal, the source of his fever was ascribed to the
             E.coli bacteria found in his blood, and the fever responded to treatment with an
             antibiotic, as expected. It was only as the Singapore General Hospital outbreak
             was being controlled that he was identified as the index case.7


                                   Figure 8.2 Transmission chain in Singapore




              * Excludes 22 cases with either no or poorly defined direct contacts or who were cases translocated to Singapore
              and the seven contacts of one of these cases.
              Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 9 May 2003,
              52(18):405–411.


                The lessons from these episodes were clear: despite stringent controls, the
             virus would exploit every opportunity to evade detection and continue infecting
             people; super-spreading events were unforgiving; and the search for SARS cases


      SARS: How a global
104   epidemic was stopped
had to be sensitive enough to catch atypical
cases. The Singapore General Hospital
outbreak led to a small cluster of seven cases
in a social group that included workers from
the hospital. The brother of the Singapore
General Hospital index case set off a cluster
at Pasir Panjang Wholesale Market [see
Chapter 17] and infected several health-care
workers and visitors to the National University
                                                  Tan Tock Seng Hospital was the epicentre for people
Hospital, where he was first admitted.            experiencing symptoms of SARS in Singapore. As
                                                  such, the Government designated it as an official
                                                  SARS hospital.
CONTROL       STRATEGIES
   The successive waves of SARS infection from atypical cases and the devastation
wreaked on the health-care system and on the people led to incremental
improvements in control strategies. The key strategies that eventually led to
containment were the following:1

HOSPITALS   AND HEALTH-CARE FACILITIES

   • Designation of Tan Tock Seng Hospital as a SARS hospital;
   • Strict temperature surveillance of all staff and patients, isolation of staff,
     and identification of “fever clusters”;
   • Enforced use of fit-tested N95 masks and other protective equipment;
   • Strict limits on hospital access for visitors and the general public;
   • Establishment of peripheral “fever clinics” to take pressure off Tan Tock
     Seng Hospital, and properly assess and treat individuals with fever; and
   • Infection control and isolation at primary health-care facilities.

COMMUNITY     CONTROL

   • Extensive, precise surveillance;
   • Rapid tracing of sources and contacts,
     with personnel from the armed services
     and other sources ready to help when
     needed;
   • Mandatory home quarantine up to 10
     days from contact, with appropriate
     social support, as well as telephone and
     video surveillance and the threat of
     monetary fines and detention, to ensure       Passengers arriving from Hong Kong walk past
     compliance;                                   an infrared fever screening system on 18 April
                                                   2003 at Singapore’s Changi Airport.




                                                                            SARS: How a global
                                                                           epidemic was stopped         105
                • Ubiquitous temperature checks in schools, workplaces, and the
                    community;
                • A dedicated ambulance service to Tan Tock Seng Hospital; and
                • Fever screening for incoming and outgoing passengers at Changi Airport
                    and other entry points.
                As might be expected, the use of very sensitive surveillance tools generated
             extra work and some false alarms. Other countries, fairly or unfairly, linked
             suspected SARS cases to individuals only in transit at Changi International Airport.
             A “fever” outbreak at the Institute of Mental Health, thought at first to be SARS,
             turned out to be due to the influenza B virus, but many inpatients and staff
             members had already been isolated or quarantined by the time the laboratory
             results were released.


             A FIRM GOVERNMENT
                 In the Singapore Government’s view, the community had a right to expect
             that all efforts would be made to limit further spread of the virus. By strictly
             enforcing quarantine orders, the Government showed that it was serious about
             doing all in its power to protect its citizens from being infected with SARS.
                 In an open letter to all Singaporeans on 22 April, Prime Minister Goh Chok
             Tong called for community cooperation, but made it clear the Government
             was not afraid to act firmly to stop the outbreak.8 “For the wider good, we now
             have to take a tougher approach in enforcing Home Quarantine Orders,” he
             said. “We simply cannot afford to have those on home quarantine breach it,
             and run the risk of going undetected for SARS, or worse, infecting others.”
                 The purpose of these actions was clear. “These measures may be harsh,” the
             Prime Minister added, “but they are necessary. Taking a lenient attitude will not
             help us break the cycle of infection. Instead, it may undermine the stringent
             infection controls we have painstakingly put in place to protect Singaporeans
             from SARS.”
                 Early cooperation from Singapore provided essential information that helped
             in the global control of the SARS outbreak. All sectors cooperated, including
             the Ministry of Health, clinicians who cared for SARS patients, and laboratory
             experts who supported the hunt for the SARS virus and the development of
             early diagnostic tests. One of the most important early lessons was that proper
             infection-control practices, like those used in Tan Tock Seng Hospital, could
             quickly halt hospital transmission.




      SARS: How a global
106   epidemic was stopped
SUCCESS …        AT LAST
    The difficult measures paid off. On
31 May, after a number of false starts, the city-
state was removed from the WHO list of areas
with recent local transmission.
    WHO called Singapore’s handling of the
crisis “exemplary” and said, “This is an
inspiring victory that should make all of us
optimistic that SARS can be contained
everywhere.”9
                                                   People return to the street after Singapore was
    The WHO statement went on, “In a few removed from the WHO list of areas with recent
cases, SARS transmission occurred in local transmissions.
situations, such as taxis, elevators, and hospital corridors, where exposure may
have been through a route other than face-to-face contact with infected droplets.
This unusual pattern necessitated an expanded policy for contact tracing and
home quarantine. Health authorities responded to all these challenges with
extraordinary measures, adjusting strategies as each new problem emerged.”
    Characteristic of Singapore’s vigilance, the Ministry of Health used the
announcement by WHO not to congratulate itself, but rather to call for increased
efforts to combat SARS. “There will be no pause in our efforts to maintain and
further enhance all our existing measures to isolate and contain the disease and
to prevent any export of the disease beyond our shores,” the Ministry said.
    “The possibility of a future imported case sparking off clusters of SARS cases
in Singapore cannot be discounted. We must therefore continue to maintain
the highest level of vigilance. … So long as there are SARS-affected areas in the
region and the world, we cannot afford to let our guard down.”10


REFERENCES
1
    Tan CC. National response to SARS: Singapore. World Health Organization
    Global Conference on Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), 17–18
    June 2003 (http://www.who.int/csr/sars/conference/june_2003/materials/
    presentations/en/sarssingapore170603.pdf, accessed on 1 April 2005).
2
    Severe acute respiratory syndrome – Singapore, 2003. Morbidity and Mortality
    Weekly Report, 2003, 52(18):405-411.
3
    Severe acute respiratory syndrome – Singapore, 2003. Weekly Epidemiological
    Record, 2003, 78:157–162.
4
    Hsu L-Y et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in Singapore: clinical
    features of index patient and initial contacts. Emerging Infectious Diseases,
    2003, 9:713–717.




                                                                             SARS: How a global
                                                                            epidemic was stopped     107
             5
                Tee AKH et al. Atypical SARS in geriatric patient. Emerging Infectious Diseases,
                2004, 10:261–264.
             6
                Tan TT et al. Atypical SARS and Escherichia coli bacteremia. Emerging Infectious
                Diseases, 2004, 10:349–352.
             7
                Chow KY et al. Outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome in a tertiary
                hospital in Singapore, linked to a primary patient with atypical presentation:
                epidemiological study. British Medical Journal, 2004, 328:195–198.
             8
                Fighting SARS together: A letter from Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong. Singapore,
                Ministry of Information, Communications and the Arts, 22 April 2003
                (http://www.sars.gov.sg/archive/PM Goh - Fighting SARS Together.htm, accessed
                1 April 2005).
             9
                Singapore removed from list of areas with local SARS transmission, Update 70.
                Geneva, World Health Organization, 30 May 2003 (http://www.who.int/csr/
                don/2003_05_30a/en/, accessed 1 April 2005).
             10
                WHO removes Singapore from list of areas with recent local transmission of
                SARS. Singapore, Ministry of Health, 30 May 2003 (http://app10.internet.gov.sg/
                Scripts/moh/sars/news/update_details.asp?id=1&mid=7481).




      SARS: How a global
108   epidemic was stopped
   9 TAIWAN, CHINA:
  FROM CONTROL TO
      OUTBREAK


   It is mid-June 2003 in Fu’an middle school in Taipei. The 175 graduates
gather one last time as the principal gives out the awards. There is music, dancing,
and laughter. As the ceremony closes, lanterns made by the graduates are lit.
“Friendship Forever,” says one; others shine forth good wishes. But some proclaim
a less frivolous message: “Beat SARS, Taiwan!”
   Only weeks earlier, that earnest rallying cry would have been dismissed as
so much whistling in the dark. Yes, beat SARS, but how?


IMPORTATIONS         APPEAR CONTROLLED
   Taiwan, China, reported its first cases of SARS on 14 March 2003, just
two days after the first WHO alert. A 54-year-old businessman had returned on
25 February from Guangdong Province, China, and developed a fever on
29 February. He was hospitalized on 8 March, and his wife, who had not gone
with him on the trip, on 14 March. No special infection-control procedures
were put in place until 14 March.1 But the only hospital transmission was on
17 March, to a doctor who helped intubate the wife. Although the doctor wore
protective equipment, his N-95 mask may not have been properly fitted. The
couple also transmitted the virus to a family member.
   Despite these incidents, by 21 April, Taiwan, China, appeared to be
successfully controlling SARS. While many SARS cases had come in from
Guangdong and Hong Kong (China), local transmission seemed limited to only
one more family contact of another case (in addition to the three described
above).2 At this time a total of 29 probable cases and no deaths had been reported
by Taiwan, China, to WHO.
   But the virus in fact had been spreading.




                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                       epidemic was stopped   109
              HIDDEN SPREAD
                   Ms MLC, a 47-year-old unemployed construction worker, presented to the
               emergency department of Hoping Hospital on 9 April, after three days of fever
               and respiratory symptoms. Her chest X-rays showed that she had bilateral
               pneumonia. So although she was not known to have travelled anywhere or
               come in contact with a known SARS case, she was isolated in a negative-pressure
               room. This was the first local case without a clear source of infection, so there
               was some question as to whether the initial laboratory confirmation was a false-
               positive result.
                                                          What was disclosed only weeks later, when
                                                      Ms MLC came off the respirator, was that she
                                                      had been on a train to Taichung on 28 March.
                                                      On the same train was an infected resident of
                                                      Hong Kong’s Amoy Gardens [see Chapter 16],
                                                      who was on his way to celebrate a traditional
                                                      festival with his family. As she was three
                                                      carriages away and had no obvious contact
                                                      with the man, it remains uncertain how the
                                                      transmission occurred. No one else was
      A hospital employee waves to journalists as he
      leaves the Taipei Municipal Hoping Hospital for infected on the train. The man’s brother would
      quarantine elsewhere.                           be the first to die from SARS in Taiwan, China.
                   Once the virus got into Hoping Hospital, it spread rapidly. It had taken two
               hours to isolate Ms MLC. That delay was enough to allow transmission of the
               virus. Hospital staff who had been in the area that she had passed through were
               infected. Of those infected, only the radiology technician who took her X-ray
               had direct contact with her, suggesting environmental contamination.
                   One of those infected was Mr CSL, a 42-year-old laundry worker at the
               hospital. He complained of fever and diarrhoea at the emergency department
               on 12 April, and returned twice with the same complaint, but continued working
               in the laundry. He was admitted to ward B8 on 16 April when his symptoms
               had worsened and treated with antibiotics for presumed Salmonella infection.
               On 18 April, his breathing grew laboured and he was moved to an isolation
               room in the intensive care unit. He tested positive for SARS on 22 April, and
               died on 29 April. Ward B8 has 24 staff; 15 were infected—the highest attack
               rate in the hospital (62%).




       SARS: How a global
110    epidemic was stopped
OUTBREAK
    On 22 April, six Hoping Hospital staff were reported to have SARS. A rapidly
increasing number of cases was reported every day. Just among the hospital
staff, 23 nurses, eight members of the support service staff, five technicians, four
nursing aides, and three doctors were later confirmed to have the disease.
    An emergency task force met on 23 April
and hastily sealed off the hospital on 24 April.
The number of potentially exposed persons was
placed at 10,000 patients and visitors, and 930
staff members.2 Patients and visitors who had
been at the hospital between 9 and 24 April
were quarantined at home. Hospital staff were
moved to designated government housing.
SARS patients and suspect cases were isolated; Two firefighers clad in full protective gear spray
some needed to be transferred to other water to disinfect Hoping Hospital after it was
                                                       closed.
designated hospitals when Hoping Hospital no
longer had room for them.
    But before the Hoping Hospital outbreak was recognized, infected patients
had already been discharged into the community or transferred to other health-
care facilities. Visitors to the hospital as well as other Hoping Hospital staff had
also been infected, and were passing the virus on. Jen Chih Hospital, a small
hospital a few blocks away, reported three cases on 30 April. The source of the
outbreak was not clear.
    A 52-year-old haemodialysis patient, treated at Jen Chih Hospital, sought
treatment at Chang Gung Memorial Hospital in Kaohsiung, more than 300
kilometres south, on 28 April. Her low-grade fever was hardly noticed. At least
19 cases—11 nurses and 8 patients—at Chang Gung Memorial Hospital were
later traced to this patient.
    After struggling, vainly, for two weeks to contain the infection, Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital was shut down on 15 May. Jen Chih Hospital was also closed
and did not reopen until July. Outbreaks in five other hospitals could be traced
back to patients who had been discharged from Hoping Hospital or Jen Chih
Hospital before these were sealed off.
    Newspaper headlines in early- to mid-May made much of a few cases of
infection in the community. A taxi driver who routinely picked up passengers
in front of Hoping Hospital died. Other reported cases included a street vendor,
a cashier in a department store, a beautician, and various homeless people. But
for all the attention these cases received in the media, they did not contribute
substantially to the spread of SARS. Inadequate hospital infection control,
exacerbated by delayed recognition of cases, was the major factor.




                                                                            SARS: How a global
                                                                           epidemic was stopped   111
                 Confirmed cases peaked twice: from 22 to 28 April, during the Hoping
             Hospital outbreak, and around 12 May, during the Chang Gung Memorial
             Hospital outbreak [see Figure 9.1]. But the number of cases reported daily
             continued to rise. From 19 to 21 May, close to 90 cases were reported daily.
             Many were not genuine SARS cases, as there was a fear of missing cases. As well
             as creating additional work, the false cases heightened negative feelings among
             the local population and the international community.
                 The public’s fears were slow to be contained. Paranoia thrived amid a
             perceived dearth of reliable information and failed attempts at concealment by
             public officials. Of those people polled in May, one in five felt they might be
             infected, and most thought the Government was not doing enough.

              Figure 9.1 Taiwan epidemic curve, confirmed cases by date of onset




               Source: Data reported to WHO



             IMPACT          OF THE EPIDEMIC
                 The outbreak in Taiwan, China, eventually became the world’s third largest,
             after those on the mainland and in Hong Kong. By 5 July, 682 cases and 84
             deaths had been reported to WHO. Laboratory tests from the start of September
             eventually confirmed 346 cases: 126 had a positive serology, 100 had positive
             PCR, and 120 others had both sets of positive results. Half (36 out of 73) of
             those who died were reported to have died from a pre-existing medical condition
             rather than SARS.




      SARS: How a global
112   epidemic was stopped
              The youngest person to die from SARS was a 23-year-old on a community-
          service stint, assisting in the transport of patients in lieu of military service. Four
          foreign workers, all under 35 and hired as private nursing aides, also died from
          SARS.
                                                                 The outbreak also wounded the
                                                              economy. The economic loss was
                                                              estimated at US$ 820 million to
                                                              US$ 1,300 million. During the SARS
                                                              outbreak, hotels, restaurants,
                                                              cinemas, shops, and markets stood
                                                              empty. Idle taxis cruised abandoned
                                                              streets, as people shunned public
(Left) Twu Shiing-jer, Health Minister for Taiwan, China,     places and large gatherings. Those
resigned over his handling of the SARS crisis. (Right) Former
Hoping Hospital superintendent Wu Kang-wen was accused        who had to venture outdoors for work
of covering up an outbreak of SARS.                           and other duties wore masks. A play
          at the National Theatre in Taipei was allowed to proceed on 8 May. The consensus
          was, “The show must go on, but we all have to wear masks.”
              The crisis also claimed political casualties. Blamed by the media for the lax
          infection controls in hospitals, the Health Minister and the Director of the Center
          for Disease Control resigned from their posts. The superintendents of Hoping
          Hospital and Jen Chih Hospital, who had delayed reporting cases, faced criminal
          charges for professional negligence.


        CONTROL         MEASURES DURING THE EPIDEMIC
           An emergency meeting of infectious disease
        specialists was held at the Taiwan Center for
        Disease Control on Sunday, 16 March. It turned
        out to be the first of the daily meetings of the
        SARS Expert Committee that formulated the
        control strategies. The committee also reviewed
        all reported cases and classified them as
        probable or suspect, or ruled out SARS if
        another diagnosis was appropriate.
           At the request of the Ministry of Health, two Epidemiologists from the CDC, Dr William Wong
                                                         (third from left) and Dr Sarah Park (far right), with
        epidemiologists from the Centers for Disease staff from the Chang Gung Memorial Hospital in
        Control and Prevention, United States of Kaohsiung.
        America (CDC), were present at the first meeting. Their participation was
        organized by the WHO Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network [see
        Chapter 2], and continued until the end of the epidemic in June. WHO staff
        joined the team on 3 May, and also stayed through to the end of the outbreak.




                                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                                       epidemic was stopped      113
                 On 28 March, SARS was listed as a reportable infectious disease in the revised
             public-health code, giving teeth to the enforcement of isolation, quarantine,
             and other control measures. Those who violated quarantine could be fined up
             to NT$ 60,000 (~ US$ 1,800). A total of 131,132 persons—50,319 close contacts
             of suspected and probable SARS patients, and 80,813 travellers from areas
             identified by WHO to have been affected by SARS—were placed in quarantine.3
             But enforcement was difficult; and many skipped quarantine.
                 Hospital infection control was the focus of containment efforts. Patients were
             isolated in negative-pressure rooms. More of these were built during the outbreak
             so that by the end, more than 2,000 negative-pressure rooms were available.
             But the major failure was delay in recognizing cases, allowing SARS to spread
             in hospitals.4 Other control measures included public-awareness campaigns, a
             dedicated fever advice hotline, and active surveillance for clusters of fever cases
             in health-care facilities.
                 As it did elsewhere, the SARS outbreak revealed weaknesses in hospital
             infection control, disease surveillance, and public health infrastructure in Taiwan,
             China. As the epidemic abated and the frenzy wound down, Taiwan-CDC put
             forward a comprehensive plan, including a massive overhaul of the public-
             health system, to prevent the spread of SARS, should it return.5


             REFERENCES
             1
                 Chen Y-C et al. Infection control and SARS transmission among healthcare
                 workers, Taiwan. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10(5):895–898.
             2
                 Severe acute respiratory syndrome – Taiwan, 2003. Morbidity and Mortality
                 Weekly Report, 2003, 52(20):461–466.
             3
                 Use of quarantine to prevent transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome,
                 Taiwan, 2003. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 2003, 52(29):680–
                 683.
             4
                 Hsieh Y-H et al. SARS outbreak, Taiwan, 2003. Emerging Infectious Diseases,
                 2004, 10(2):201–206.
             5
                 Ho MS, Su IJ. Preparing to prevent severe acute respiratory syndrome and
                 other respiratory infections. Lancet Infectious Diseases, 2004, 4(11):684–689.




      SARS: How a global
114   epidemic was stopped
 10 THE PHILIPPINES:
   HOW CONTACT
  TRACING WORKED


HOLY WEEK 2003: IN                            SEARCH OF COMMUNITY
TRANSMISSION
   Easter is an important holiday in the predominantly Catholic Philippines. To
celebrate it, families return in droves to their hometowns the week before. On
Monday, 14 April 2003, as the traditional exodus out of Metro Manila* began, a
drama was being played out. An intense search for an imported case of SARS
was unfolding.


INDEX CASE
    Ms AC, a 46-year-old Filipino nursing attendant in Toronto, Canada, had
come home for the Easter holidays with a special mission: to find a faith healer
for her father, who had cancer. She had given a goodbye hug to her housemate’s
mother before leaving Toronto on 2 April. The mother was feeling ill, and
would be hospitalized with SARS by the time Ms AC arrived in the Philippines,
late on 4 April.
    Ms AC was met by relatives at the airport early Saturday morning, 5 April,
and they drove north to their home village in Alcala, Pangasinan province (five
or six hours’ drive from Manila).
    Ms AC started feeling ill and achy on 6 April, and developed fever, diarrhoea,
and abdominal pains the next day. But she ignored her symptoms and tried to
treat them herself. Intent on her quest for a faith healer for her father, she
continued travelling with him over much of the northern provinces. On 11 April
she started coughing. Worried relatives took her the next day to a private hospital
in a nearby town, where she was admitted. On 13 April her condition worsened:
she could hardly breathe. Only then did she mention that she might have been in


* Metro Manila is the metropolitan area that contains the City of Manila, the capital of the Philippines, plus 16
neighbouring cities and municipalities. Metro Manila is often simply referred to as Manila, especially by non-residents.


                                                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                                                      epidemic was stopped   115
             contact with a possible SARS case in Toronto. Her relatives transferred her at
             once to San Lazaro Hospital in Manila, the national referral hospital for infectious
             diseases as well as one of two SARS referral hospitals in Metro Manila. In rapid
             decline, Ms AC was intubated. At 4:10 a.m. on Monday, 14 April, just as the rest
             of the country was settling in for the Easter holidays, she died.


             SEARCH FOR CONTACTS
                Notified by San Lorenzo Hospital about Ms AC’s admission and subsequent
             death, the National Epidemiology Center (NEC) of the Department of Health
             under the leadership of the Secretary for Health, Dr Manuel Dayrit, started
             mobilizing its network of “diseases detectives”.1 All of Ms AC’s contacts from
             the time her fever had started on 7 April up to her admission and isolation at
             San Lazaro Hospital had to be identified. That week, Ms AC had travelled with
             her father and other relatives to nine cities and towns in four provinces and to
             Metro Manila [see Figure 10.1].

                             Figure 10.1 Travel and contacts of index case, Ms AC




                Source: Department of Health, Philippines



      SARS: How a global
116   epidemic was stopped
    A massive, weeklong contact-tracing operation, unprecedented in scale,
began. Fellows of the NEC’s Field Epidemiology Training Programme (FETP)
were placed on 24-hour rotation. They had been trained in SARS surveillance
using investigation guidelines drawn up a month earlier and had also traced the
contacts of previous suspected imported cases. A war room, with hotlines and
other communication facilities, was set up at the NEC Epidemiology Surveillance
Units (ESUs) in the field, particularly in the Ilocos region and Tarlac province,
were contacted to support the investigation.
    Epidemiologists hurriedly searched for contacts that week, while most
Filipinos were on vacation in the provinces. From a handful of contacts on
Tuesday, 15 April, the list on the war room whiteboard had grown to 54 by the
next day. Those who had been at a wedding with Ms AC in nearby Tarlac
province were included in the search. Photographs helped in tracking down
the wedding party. In three days, about 200 contacts were added to the list,
bringing the total by Easter Sunday to more than 250 family members and
friends, and nine staff members at the hospital in Pangasinan province where
Ms AC had first been admitted.
    Close family members were quarantined at the Research Institute for Tropical
Medicine (RITM) in Muntinlupa City, Metro Manila’s other SARS referral hospital.
All other contacts, including the residents in three zones in Ms AC’s home village,
were quarantined at home. Epidemiologists and health workers closely monitored
these contacts and recorded their temperature and symptoms for 10 days after
their last encounter with Ms AC.


WHOLE AREAS OF VILLAGE QUARANTINED
   In Ms AC’s home village, the epidemiologists
identified two close contacts and 14 social
contacts through a spot map they had drawn
of all households. To prevent the disease from
spreading around the village, they quarantined
the three zones where these contacts lived.
Food was brought in for 800 or so residents,
who were not allowed to leave the zones. Only
medical and surveillance teams from the
Department of Health and the local
                                                 President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo (left), together
government, and policemen on patrol, could with government officials and Dr Jean-Marc Olivé,
enter these areas. A handful of journalists and WHO Representative for the Philippines (centre),
                                                 announces the lifting of the quarantine.
TV crews, who had been in the area
researching a story on the outbreak, had to be quarantined as well.
   Already fearful of contamination with the deadly virus, the residents also
had to endure discrimination. They could not sell their main crop, tobacco.
Emotions understandably ran high. To remove the stigma and hasten the return


                                                                              SARS: How a global
                                                                             epidemic was stopped     117
             to normal life once the village was cleared, the President of the Philippines, the
             Secretary of Health, and other top government officials, as well as the WHO
             Representative, visited the village on 2 May to declare the quarantine over.


             THE OUTBREAK
                 Ms MDB, a 39-year-old radiology technician, had taken Ms AC’s chest X-rays
             on admission to San Lazaro Hospital on 13 April. To take the X-rays, Ms MDB
             had to be in very close contact with Ms MC, who was in very poor health by then.
             Ms MDB apparently had not worn goggles and had worn her N95 mask over her
             surgical mask, resulting in a loose fit. She developed fever and malaise on 17
             April, but was not isolated until 21 April, when she was hospitalized with
             pneumonia.2
                 Eight close family contacts of Ms AC were isolated in RITM on 18 and 19 April.
             Though her 73-year-old father (Mr MC) was feverish on admission, his
             temperature was just under 38°C because he was taking paracetamol to relieve
             the pain from cancer. He had no respiratory symptoms and his chest X-rays
             were normal. Only when his condition rapidly deteriorated, on 21 April, was
             he recognized as a SARS case. By then he had hypoxaemia and his chest X-rays
             showed bilateral diffuse infiltrates. He was intubated on 22 April, and died a
             few hours later. The 35-year-old nurse (Mr LA) and the 32-year-old doctor (Ms
             EM) who intubated him both developed SARS but were likewise not isolated
             until after the onset of symptoms.
                 Mr MC2, a brother-in-law of Ms AC, was with her from the time of her
             arrival and had carried the coughing woman into San Lorenzo Hospital. He
             became feverish and was admitted to hospital the next day but showed no
             further symptoms. His chest X-ray remained normal. But he tested positive for
             SARS-CoV.
                 Aside from Mr MC2, three of Ms AC’s immediate family members developed
             SARS because of inadequate isolation during their hospital quarantine. Her 29-
             year-old niece, Ms JC, took care of Ms AC’s father (Mr MC) up to the time of his
             death and may have been infected in the process. Ms JC probably passed on the
             virus to Ms AC’s 71-year-old mother (Ms PC) and 52-year-old brother (Mr RC).
                 Mr RC was the last SARS case in this outbreak to show symptoms (on 3 May).
             There were no other transmissions. Nearly 60 contacts of the three infected
             health workers (Ms MDB, Mr LA, and Ms EM) were identified and monitored for
             fever. None developed symptoms.
                 In all, the outbreak involved nine people, including Ms AC [see Figure 10.2].
             Transmissions after 22 April were limited to quarantined family members. Thus,
             when the Philippines was placed on the WHO list of countries with recent
             transmission on 7 May, there was no longer any risk of transmission, except in
             the isolation ward of that one hospital. Contacts who might have been infected
             at that time were being closely monitored for symptoms.


      SARS: How a global
118   epidemic was stopped
              Figure 10.2 Transmission chain in the Philippines




Source: Data reported to WHO




RISK OF INFECTION IN CONTACTS
    Excluding the three family members who were infected while in quarantine,
only two of Ms AC’s many contacts in the community (her father and brother-
in-law) were infected, for an attack rate of less than 1%. On the other hand, the
three health workers infected in the outbreak represented about 10% of health
workers who had been in contact with the cases. This much higher risk of
infection among health workers parallels the findings in other countries with
larger outbreaks.
    In retrospect, the community contacts had to be traced to prove that the
virus had spread no further. If a single case had been missed, it could have
generated many other chains of transmission.
    Another interesting aspect is that three of the family members became infected
while in hospital quarantine as isolation procedures were still being strengthened.


                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   119
             It is sometimes assumed that suspected cases could be quarantined together.
             This outbreak shows the danger of isolating people as a group, as anyone with
             the virus can spread it to the others.


             CONTACT          TRACING FOR OTHER CASES IN THE             PHILIPPINES
                                                    On 15 March, the Philippines learned from
                                                the WHO office in Viet Nam that a close
                                                contact (Mr RT) of Mr JC (the Hanoi index case)
                                                had returned to the Philippines from Viet Nam
                                                on 11 March. The Secretary of Health advised
                                                hospital quarantine. Mr RT was first admitted
                                                to a SARS reference hospital, and then released
                                                to home confinement. He had diarrhoea but
                                                did not develop respiratory symptoms.
                                                    Besides the cluster of nine cases that
             included the index case from Toronto, the Philippines reported four other
             probable SARS cases. The first was announced by President Gloria Macapagal-
             Arroyo on national television from the war room in Malacañang Palace on 11
             April 2003. Although the four cases were not proven to be SARS cases, they led
             investigators to 100 contacts. Eighty other suspected cases where the probability
             of SARS was ruled out were linked to 400 contacts. All these contacts were
             identified and followed up to ensure that none developed symptoms. A panel
             of infectious disease, pulmonary, radiology and epidemiology experts formed
             by the Health Department met regularly during this time to review admitted
             cases of SARS. The recommendations of this panel guided Health Secretary
             Dayrit in choosing appropriate control measures.
                In May, the United Kingdom notified the Philippines that a British-Filipino
             couple infected at the Metropole Hotel [see Chapter 14] and hospitalized with
             pneumonia in the Philippines in early March had tested positive for SARS when
             they returned to the United Kingdom. NEC searched for SARS transmissions
             among the contacts of this couple during their stay in the Philippines. Of the
             115 contacts found, 80 had been in close contact with the couple, but none
             developed fever subsequently.3


             IMPACT          ON   FILIPINOS   WORKING OVERSEAS
                SARS and the possibility of its spread terrified Filipinos. They shunned those
             who returned home from working overseas, for fear that they might be bringing
             back the virus with them. Worse news awaited these overseas Filipino workers
             and others wishing to join their ranks. On 7 May 2003 WHO classified the
             Philippine pattern of transmission as “medium” because more than one
             generation of spread was involved. As a result, several countries refused to admit


      SARS: How a global
120   epidemic was stopped
anyone from the Philippines or banned the
entry of Filipino workers, with huge personal
and economic consequences for the country.
    On 10 May, the Philippine Government
complained in a letter to WHO that the
“medium’ categorization was misleading since
the outbreak had been limited to hospital and
family contacts. As a result, WHO changed
the categories from “low”, “medium”, and
                                                 Demonstrators protest alleged discrimination
“high” to “A”, “B”, and “C”. But the definitions against foreign-born domestic helpers in
stayed the same, and so did the impact on Hong Kong (China). A small group, mostly domestic
                                                 helpers from the Philippines and Indonesia, claimed
the Philippines.                                 that, because of the SARS virus, employers refused
    The small outbreak was contained by the to allow their helpers to take their days off.
end of April. Risk had been limited to close contacts, and all contacts had been
traced. WHO’s Regional and country offices tried to rectify the harm caused by
the inclusion of the Philippines among the countries with SARS transmission,
and to develop a more rational assessment of epidemiological risk.


REFERENCES
1
    Gepte TD, Daluro ATM. A race against a virus: a report of contact tracing
    conducted during the Philippines SARS outbreak. Manila, Department of
    Health, 2003. [Unpublished].
2
    Aumentado CP, Mapue MC. Narrative report of a SARS suspected case at San
    Lazaro Hospital. Manila, National Epidemiology Center, Department of Health,
    25 April 2003.
3
    Lopez J et al. Investigation on Philippines contacts of United Kingdom SARS couple
    from X Hotel, Hong Kong. Manila, Department of Health, 21 October 2003.




                                                                               SARS: How a global
                                                                              epidemic was stopped     121
                   11 MONGOLIA: A
                   SMALL OUTBREAK
                  WITH A BIG IMPACT


                  The independent country of Mongolia borders the northern Chinese
              autonomous region of Inner Mongolia. The shared name meant that tourists
              stayed away from Mongolia when WHO added Inner Mongolia to the list of
              affected areas and then advised against all but essential travel. Transmission in
              Inner Mongolia also led to a small SARS outbreak in Mongolia. The impact of
              this small outbreak, which involved a single local transmission, was profound.
              Among other effects, marketplaces and entertainment houses closed, and
              international travel was curtailed.


              ORIGIN OF         OUTBREAK
                                                               SARS transmission started in Inner
                                                           Mongolia, China, after two flight attendants
                                                           who were infected on flight CA112 returned
                                                           home in late March [see Chapter 15]. They
                                                           were admitted to a hospital in Hohhot City,
                                                           the capital of Inner Mongolia, consequently
                                                           setting off an unrecognized transmission of
                                                           the virus.
                                                               The SARS virus was brought into Mongolia
                                                           by five people from three local families. They
      Ms NS (left) is considered to be the index case for  had been infected while seeking medical
      the outbreak in Mongolia. She and five others were
      treated in the isolation unit at the National Center
                                                           treatment in Inner Mongolia in March.
      for Communicable Diseases in Ulaanbataar and             A husband (63), wife (60), and daughter
      recovered.
                                                           (32) in family A, a woman (57) in family B,
                and another woman (59) in family C, all spent time in the same hospital room
                in Hohhot City.




       SARS: How a global
122    epidemic was stopped
FAMILY A
   The 60-year-old woman, Ms NS, was the first to develop symptoms. On 29
March, she developed a fever and cough while being treated in a hospital in
Hohhot. She was discharged from the hospital on 1 April, and returned to
Ulaanbaatar by train on 4 April with her husband, daughter, and grandchild in
the same cabin. As it was five to seven days before symptoms showed in any of
the others, she is likely to be the index case for the outbreak.
   The 63-year-old husband, Mr DU, accompanied his wife to Inner Mongolia
and visited her in the hospital. He developed symptoms on 5 April. The 32-
year-old daughter, Ms UB, cared for her mother in the hospital and slept in her
room. She developed a fever on 7 April and a cough on 12 April.

FAMILY B
   The 57-year-old woman, Ms DTs, stayed in the hospital’s hotel for three
days and then was admitted. She was assigned to the same room as Ms NS and
her daughter. Ms DTs flew to Ulaanbaatar on 4 April and, on the following day,
developed a fever, cough, and headache.

FAMILY C
    The 59-year-old woman, Ms TsD, was admitted to the same Hohhot hospital
on 18 March and shared a room with the other women until 24 March. She
returned to Mongolia on 4 April on the same flight as Ms DTs. She developed
symptoms on 7 April.
    In early April, these five infected persons
were referred to the National Center for
Communicable Diseases and isolated in the
infectious disease hospital on 12 and 13 April.
Laboratory analysis of blood and chest X-rays
was conducted. The five were kept in isolation
with initial diagnosis of suspected SARS.
Clinical specimens of serum, nasopharyngeal
aspirate, and throat swab were sent for
confirmation to a WHO Regional Reference Clinical specimens from the five SARS cases               were
                                                         processed at this laboratory.
Laboratory in Japan.
    The Ministry of Health issued a Health Alert Notice for all visitors to Mongolia. Travellers
were advised to observe their health for at least 10 days and to consult a physician or call
the National Center for Communicable Diseases if they developed fever.


LOCAL TRANSMISSION
   The impact of these five SARS cases was made much more serious by the
fact that they led to one local transmission in Mongolia. Ms OZ, the 28-year-old
daughter of Ms DTs who did not travel to Inner Mongolia, developed symptoms

                                                                               SARS: How a global
                                                                              epidemic was stopped        123
                             Figure 11.1 Transmission chain in Mongolia, 2003




              Source: Data reported to WHO


             on 15 April and was admitted to hospital on 19 April. This single local transmission
             pushed Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia, onto WHO’s list of affected areas.
                 Three more imported cases of SARS were identified in students returning
             from Beijing. They were isolated between 26 April and 2 May. All nine SARS
             cases in Mongolia recovered. And although intensive medical care services were
             provided to all probable and suspected SARS cases, no medical personnel were
             affected by SARS in the country.
                 From 12 April to 25 June 2003, 1,529 close contacts of the nine people with
             SARS were identified and quarantined in their home under the observation of
             their family doctor. None developed SARS. And neither did any of the
             61,109 people who had been screened at the Mongolia–China border by 25 June,
             including 15 who were isolated at local hospitals in the south of the country.


             CONTROL          MEASURES
                 On 13 April, the Government of Mongolia responded to the impending
             crisis by issuing a decree specifying various control measures. Many of the
             activities had been recommended by WHO; others were even more stringent.
             Through the decree, the Government:
                  • closed 12 land border points between Mongolia and China, and from
                      23 April carried out strict entry screening and the disinfection of all
                      cars, trains, and planes on entry;
                  • advised officials and workers not to travel to countries with local
                      transmission;
                  • closed all big marketplaces, first for two weeks and later for another two;
                  • postponed public performances (e.g. cultural shows, circus shows) to
                      reduce the chance of disease transmission;

      SARS: How a global
124   epidemic was stopped
    •   prepared health institutions to identify and manage suspected SARS cases,
        and set up isolation facilities in Dornogobi Province in the south,
        including five beds in the railway hospital in Zamyn-Uud district at the
        border with China and a 50-bed isolation ward in Sain-Shand, the
        provincial capital; and
     • created four groups of experts to undertake surveillance and control of
        SARS together with city health-department workers, railway-station
        officials, and airport control authorities.
    The Government set aside a substantial part of the national budget to support
these measures, and coordinated with donors for additional funding. More than
US$ 150,000 was allocated for the procurement of medical equipment and
supplies that were not available in Mongolia, including personal protective
equipment, respirator machines, laboratory equipment, and essential antiviral
drugs. There were no in-hospital transmissions, partly thanks to the adequate
supply of protective equipment for hospital staff, including masks, provided by
Japan International Cooperation Agency and the Asian Development Bank
(through WHO’s Regional Office).
    WHO dispatched international experts to Mongolia to help with infection
control and case management. A SARS preparedness assessment was conducted
with technical support from WHO, following the training of 650 health-care
workers on barrier nursing techniques, case management, and infection control.


OUTBREAK CONTAINED
    On 9 May 2003, WHO announced that Mongolia had been removed from
its list of areas with recent local transmission. The last and only case of local
transmission was isolated on 19 April.
    Mongolia’s small outbreak had a big
impact on tourism. The year 2003 had been
designated “Visit to Mongolia” year and the
Government was hoping that the number of
foreign tourists would increase to 230,000.
However, tourist arrivals fell substantially in
May; restaurants, the entertainment industry,
and hotels lost revenue during the one month
of emergency conditions in the capital city.      All persons crossing the border from China, and
    SARS also affected the transportation travelling from an “affected area”, were isolated in
                                                  this building in Zaamin Uud. Before a WHO team
sector. According to MIAT Mongolian could inspect the building, the entrance had to be
Airlines, the number of international flights disinfected.
for the April–June period declined from 89 to 38. The Mongolian Railway
Authority estimated that it lost more than 1 billion togrog (~US$ 1 million) in
revenue due to SARS.



                                                                            SARS: How a global
                                                                           epidemic was stopped     125
                12 CANADA: HOW A
                 HOSPITAL COPED


                 New glass walls went up in the intensive care unit of Scarborough Hospital
             in the winter of 2003. The floor-to-ceiling enclosures barricade each bed,
             separating one patient from another, keeping the sick from the healthy. If every
             war has its monument, these walls now stand as a symbolic victory to the only
             goal that mattered the winter that SARS hit Canada: containment.
                 Before the battle, Scarborough’s multisite facility in Toronto’s east end was
             known best for its two acute-care community hospitals, where women delivered
             babies, the elderly recovered from falls, and doctors performed surgeries. But
             after SARS appeared unannounced at Scarborough’s Grace division in March
             2003, the hospital earned a less enviable reputation as the epicentre of an
             outbreak that crippled Canada’s largest city.
                 SARS killed 38 men and women in the Toronto area over a four-month
             period, 44 in all. More than 250 fell sick and around 10,000 were forced into
             quarantine. Local public health officials, like those in the rest of the world,
             knew little about their new microbial enemy when it hit. But what precious
             intelligence they did gather came largely from the devastation it wreaked first at
             Scarborough Hospital, the epidemiological root of nearly all of Toronto’s cases.
                 The virus struck Scarborough Hospital twice, first at its Grace division and
             then in a demoralizing second wave at its General site. In all, 100 staff members
             fell ill, many of them seriously, forcing the hospital to close and plunging those
             left standing into the surreal horror of caring for sick colleagues, working under
             quarantine, worrying for themselves and their families, and all the while serving
             the patients who remained in their wards.
                 Paul Caulford, Scarborough Hospital’s chief of family medicine and
             community services, said the experience represented the greatest challenge of
             their professional careers, but at the same time offered profound lessons about
             solidarity. “I always wondered how you can be in a war and the guy in front of
             you gets shot and somehow the next guy just steps up and keeps going,” he said.
             “But we had a common enemy, we didn’t panic. Everyone worked, under
             incredible strain, from the administration to the cleaners, who would scrub one
             area and a little while later come back and scrub it again.”



      SARS: How a global
126   epidemic was stopped
                                  Figure 12.1 Canada epidemic curve




 Source: Data reported to WHO



INDEX CASE
    It had been a true ambush. Hospital and medical staff were unsuspecting
and unprepared. The index patient, 44-year-old Mr TCK, arrived at the Grace
emergency department on the evening of 7 March 2003 with symptoms that
jam emergency rooms across the city every winter. His coughing, fever, and
shortness of breath sounded like a routine flu or community-acquired
pneumonia. But in fact, Mr TCK had contracted SARS—a mysterious disease
that had not yet been named. His mother had been unknowingly infected during
a recent trip to Hong Kong (China) and upon her return, passed the virus to her
family before dying in her Toronto home on 5 March.*
    Hospital staff, working with the city’s public health officials and infectious
disease experts, connected Mr TCK’s case to the atypical pneumonia spreading
in parts of Asia. Email alerts sent on 20 and 21 February had warned doctors,
infection-control specialists and public-health authorities to look out for
influenza-like symptoms in travellers returning from China. On 12 March, WHO
issued a global alert regarding the mystery illness.
    Mr TCK, who died on 13 March, had passed the virus to a 76-year-old patient
who would become the source of another SARS cluster.** Six health workers
contracted the disease in a single effort to intubate him and from 18 March



* For more information on the link between the outbreaks in Hong Kong and Toronto, see Chapter 14: Solving The Metropole Hotel Mystery.
** The patient was transferred to York Central Hospital, north of Toronto, where more than 50 of his contacts developed SARS.



                                                                                                                         SARS: How a global
                                                                                                                        epidemic was stopped   127
              onward, at least one staff member developed SARS every day for the next week—
              nurses in coronary care, ICU, emergency. Hospital rooms were soon filled with
              health-care workers.
                 “We were compiling list after list on staffing and patients, timings and shifts
              and points of contact, and who was taking care of which patients, and phone
              numbers and the names of all the families and families who visited,” said Louise
              Leblanc, director of patient care for the emergency departments at Scarborough’s
              Grace and General sites.


              IMPACT ON        HEALTH WORKERS AND SERVICES
                                                               Sandy Finkelstein, later chief of
                                                           medicine at Scarborough’s Grace site, was
                                                           then director of its intensive care unit.
                                                           Watching the disease spread to the staff as
                                                           he struggled to find ways to treat the
                                                           patients and control the infection
                                                           “increased stress levels dramatically,” he
                                                           said. Yet there were no medical references
                                                           to point to the best course of treatment.
                                                           Nor was there space for the steadily growing
                                                           caseload at the Grace site, which then had
      In late May 2003, Dr Rex Verschuren was the only     just four separate rooms and one negative-
      doctor working at a four-doctor family practice in
      Scarborough as a result of SARS. Two were in serious air-pressure chamber. On 23 March, 14
      condition in the hospital and the third was at home  sick staff members had to be transferred to
      recovering.
                                                           isolation units at the West Park Healthcare
               Centre, a former TB sanatorium in west Toronto.
                    Dr Finkelstein brought yo-yos and chocolates to his colleagues at West Park,
               many of whom were relying on respirators to breathe. “Seeing my staff there,
               sick, some of whom I know well, and some of them were really sick, was horrible,”
               he said. “Some of them suffered chest scarring. Some of them will never come
               back.”
                    Ontario’s provincial health officials ordered the Grace site closed on 25 March.
               Few members of the staff were healthy enough at that point to even work the
               emergency department, one of the busiest in the city, with 40,000 visits a year.
                    Dr Finkelstein recalled the disturbing image of the yellow police tape that
               blocked off the Grace site hospital entrance as though it were a crime scene.
               Ambulances were diverted. Pregnant women were directed elsewhere. All
               appointments and procedures, including all cancer-related surgeries, were
               cancelled—a catastrophic setback for a public-health system already notorious
               for its dangerous delays and waiting lists. “The system is so tight that taking one
               hospital out of service was devastating,” Dr Finkelstein said. “There was no
               coordinated effort to deal with the patients who had nowhere to go.” Meanwhile,


       SARS: How a global
128    epidemic was stopped
he said, there were doctors and surgeons around who had nothing to do for
weeks.
    Yet people continued to get sick. “You could not build a rabbit-proof fence,”
said Dr Caulford. “The elderly will still fall and have lacerations, there will still
be people who need somewhere to go.” But emergency services at the General
site had also been curtailed as a preventive measure, and, as Dr Caulford saw it,
support for the front-line family doctors in the community had been overlooked.
    “The irony is that the only doctor to die in the outbreak was a family doctor
in the community,” he said. “It became apparent that family doctors weren’t
being given any instructions—or supplies.”
    Dr Caulford, who heads the area’s Family Practitioners Group, received a
flood of frantic calls from colleagues in those early days asking, “Should we
take everyone’s temperature? How would we know the (epidemiological) link?
Where are the masks?” Dr Caulford ordered 6,000 masks to be distributed among
them.
    Inside the Grace site, a skeleton staff settled into a gruelling routine to keep
the battered hospital running. Day after day, they started their shifts shivering in
the cold, damp parking lot, waiting to have their temperatures taken to make
sure they were SARS-free. Many arrived by 7 a.m. and worked late into the
night. Some did not leave at all. Some were so worried they might infect family
members they bunked at the hospital—including a nurse with a newborn at
home, and another who had an elderly mother to care for. “Staff were scared.
They were terrified for themselves and their families,” said Dr Finkelstein.
    But still they worked, in gowns, gloves, and, of course, the outbreak’s
trademark clammy and cumbersome N-95 masks.
    No one was immune to anxiety. “We all wanted guarantees that we weren’t
going to be ill,” said Ms Leblanc. Some questioned why certain staff members
were quarantined in the comfort of their homes while others had to remain on
duty during the 10-day period of isolation. Others grew frustrated and mistrustful
of changing policies and protocols as authorities tinkered with infection-control
procedures. Still others wondered why they had to work in the designated SARS
ward, where patients had to wear television headsets to shut out the drone of
the new negative-air-pressure units and where, naturally, the personal health
risks were considered most daunting.
    “Emotions ran very high, some positive, some negative,” said Ms Leblanc.
“There was anger at times. I think it was the fear of the unknown, yet we still
had patients and they still had to work, and so we had the compliance of staff,
and an acceptance of the situation.”
    Dr Finkelstein marvelled at how initial complaints from the staff simply melted
away into the demands of a very demanding job: “People kept coming to work,
not protesting. Emergency staff took care of their own until, literally, there was
no one left standing,” he said. “I gained a great deal of respect for many of my


                                                                         SARS: How a global
                                                                        epidemic was stopped   129
             colleagues. They did a truly remarkable job, and all through it, people wore
             their feelings on their sleeves.”
                  Ms Leblanc felt the staff survived because even the “little milestones” could
             lift spirits. “Every day there were no new cases, people had hope, so you never
             felt like giving up.”
                  Despite their own concerns and hardships, staff members were deeply
             saddened to see patients suddenly finding themselves sicker and lonelier than
             they had ever imagined. While most patients had been evacuated when the
             Grace division closed, at least 30 remained in the building, as some were just
             too sick to be moved. It was heart-wrenching to have to deny them visitors, Ms
             Leblanc said.
                  “Every morning we made a list of patients who could have a single visitor,
             but it had to be the same visitor every time,” she said, as she went on to describe
             a patient’s delight at seeing his dog, whom a neighbour had brought to the
             hospital grounds.
                  Worse too, many of the patients were elderly, and had already also suffered
             heart attacks and strokes. “That was my difficulty,” Dr Finkelstein said. “The
             patients.”
                  Plans were under way to create additional isolation rooms at the General
             site for patients from the Grace division, where 44 nurses, technicians, and
             doctors were infected during the outbreak. The General, however, soon needed
             these rooms for its own staff. A patient transferred to the General in mid-May
             from an area nursing home turned out to be incubating the virus, which he had
             picked up at another hospital. But by the time the patient’s symptoms appeared,
             the chain of infection had already been unleashed.
                  Although no one who had worn protective gear caring for the patient became
             infected, everyone had to be quarantined, some for the second time. In the end,
             nearly five dozen health workers at the General developed SARS, and some of
             them would still need respirators six months later.
                  Dr Caulford, who holds office at the General, feared then that the virus
             would defeat them. “Staffing was a nightmare in a system already bled dry,” he
             said. “When I heard that Toronto had several thousand people in isolation, that
             people were also breaking their quarantine, and that Toronto Public Health
             didn’t have enough staff to do proper fast-tracking of people, … I never believed
             for one minute that we would stop this thing.”
                  But he discovered that no one allowed his or her worst fears to triumph. As
             they had done at the Grace site, staff members continued to clock in and camp
             out. “I never saw them in better form,” Dr Caulford said. “The illness of
             colleagues heightened the resolve to work. It made us more cautious, reminding
             ourselves and each other about our precautions.
                  The long days were packed with meetings—conference calls between senior
             staff members and government health officials, administration and management
             meetings, nursing meetings, general meetings (but always in smallish groups,

      SARS: How a global
130   epidemic was stopped
since large gatherings were to be avoided). There was
a fevered swap of questions and issues. Dr Caulford
said, “People wanted to know, ‘What’s the virus
doing?’ ‘Who’s sick?’ ‘How are we staffing this unit or
that?’ ‘Can we transfer anyone?’”
    He went on, “Sure, there was a lot of rancorous
discussion about what we should do, about what was
best. But these were constructive discussions. We had
war rooms, bunkers, command centres.”
    What amazed him during this most stressful stretch
was the sense of camaraderie, cooperation, and
genuine concern among colleagues. “These were
people who were ready to knock your kneecaps off
two weeks before if their programme didn’t get funded.
… You end up with a hell of a lot of admiration for Several hundred health-care workers
                                                            gathered outside Scarborough Hospital
people you work with.”                                      on 4 June 2003 for a rally aimed at the
    In 48 hours Dr Caulford managed to recruit enough provincial government regarding the re-
staff members to run a provincially ordered SARS emergence of SARS and the conditions
                                                            hospital staff found themselves working
assessment clinic that was hastily built in the General’s in since the outbreak.
parking lot on 2 June. The tented structure, outfitted
with $500,000 in medical equipment, popped up overnight. The wind blew
through it, there was no running water, but nurses and doctors stood guard
inside until 31 July 2003, when, at long last, there were no more SARS cases left
to catch.
    But the public was hardly disposed to look kindly on Scarborough Hospital
during these trying months. As SARS ruined businesses, closed schools, and
curtailed medical services across the province, some people viewed the east-
end facility much as they did the local Chinatown—with suspicion, and outright
accusation.
    Ms Leblanc recounted how motorists driving past the assessment clinic tent
would roll down their windows and shout at the staff inside. “They were profanely
abused for the state of the system, for the economy, for the mess SARS had left
things in,” she said. “When you are tired and frustrated, and you’re working 16-
hour days and more, hearing those comments drove many to tears.” Within 24
hours a wall went up between the roadside and the clinic.
    Dr Finkelstein blamed some media reports for the sense that “Scarborough
was, ‘oooh, a dirty place.’” He said, “From the inside, I thought people were
quite heroic. Here we did backflips trying to care for the patients, treating people
with a disease that you had no history on. You didn’t know most people with
fevers would go on to develop chest syndrome, and so on. All of this you learned
as you went along.”
    At the end of May, provincial health authorities carried out an intense audit
of the Grace hospital site based on 34 items. With no new cases in more than

                                                                              SARS: How a global
                                                                             epidemic was stopped     131
             10 days and evidence that the hospital had instituted strict measures to screen
             patients, control infection, and limit visitor access, the Grace slowly reopened.
             Obstetrics was the first unit to accept new patients. Beds in long-term care filled
             up once more, followed by the intensive care unit and coronary care. Then, on
             3 June, the yellow tape was at last removed from the emergency department
             entrance.
                 An independent review by Justice Archie Campbell of the handling of the
             Toronto outbreak did not blame any one hospital for the spread of SARS in the
             region. Released in April 2004, the report said that Ontario’s public health
             system had proved to be fractured, underfunded, poorly staffed, and poorly led
             during the SARS crisis. In fact, the Campbell review concluded that only the
             “heroic” efforts of dedicated health-care workers had prevented the wider spread
             of the virus in the community.


             EPILOGUE
                 A year after the outbreak, there were clear signs of change at Scarborough
             Hospital. The Grace site had twice as many isolation rooms, and six negative-
             air-pressure chambers. Renovations were under way at the General division.
             Staff in the emergency departments—where visits were down nearly 10%—
             treated everyone who walked in, particularly those with respiratory problems,
             as suspicious and possibly contagious. And, of course, there were the glass walls
             in the intensive care unit.
                 Ms Leblanc compares the “new normal” to the changes that followed the
             emergence of HIV in the 1980s. No health worker would ever again work in
             any way with blood or bodily fluids without wearing gloves, she said. So now,
             in the post-SARS world, hospitals will greet every potential patient with face
             masks, walls, and intensive screening.
                 It must be this way, Ms Leblanc said, if hospitals are to defeat the next threat
             from the microbial world. For her, the hospital’s closure was a low point of the
             outbreak. Hospitals have to remain up and functioning during outbreaks, she
             said. They are the battlegrounds. “If we are going to close them when these
             things happen, you feel like a failure.”
                 Though buoyed by “a sense of ‘wow, we did it’”, the nursing staff at
             Scarborough Hospital, she said, is fragile. A few nurses have left their jobs.
             Others have chosen assignments outside the front-line emergency department.
                 “A lot of people have re-evaluated their lives professionally,” said Dr Caulford,
             admitting the SARS experience has made the annual physical “a little less exciting”.
             “This was extreme medicine, but it was the most purposeful work as a physician
             that I’ve ever done.”
                 Dr Caulford mused, “It was a messy war, so how do you judge people? Is it
             enough to say that more things were done right than were done wrong? For all
             our human frailties, we won. And I never thought we would.”


      SARS: How a global
132   epidemic was stopped
PART III: OUTBREAKS




                 SARS: How a global
                epidemic was stopped   133
      SARS: How a global
134   epidemic was stopped
 13 THE FIRST SUPER-
  SPREADING EVENT


INDEX CASE
   Mr ZZF, a 44-year-old seafood seller from the Fangcun suburbs of
Guangzhou, in Southern China, had been troubled for five days by a cough and
fever. On 30 January 2003, he decided to seek medical treatment at the No. 2
Affiliated Hospital of Zhongshan Medical University (also called Sun Yatsen
Memorial Hospital) in Guangzhou. As his chest X-rays had patchy shadows in
the upper right lung, he was admitted with a diagnosis of pneumonia. On
1 February, his condition worsened and he was transferred to the designated
hospital for cases of atypical pneumonia: No. 3 Affiliated Hospital of Zhongshan
Medical University. Medical staff began an emergency intubation down his
throat. They had no idea that he would be so infectious, and that this procedure
would be dangerous for them.


TRANSMISSIONS         AT   NO. 2 HOSPITAL
    The impact of Mr ZZF’s two-day stay at No. 2 Hospital was explosive. The
SARS working group at the hospital linked 96 infections to his brief admission:
90 health workers, five family members, and one patient.1 Their symptoms started
appearing up to 20 days after contact with Mr ZZF, suggesting that some of
them were not directly infected (as SARS generally has a maximum incubation
period of 10 days). Another report on this super-spreading event states that
30 health workers were infected from contact with Mr ZZF in No. 2 Hospital,
and that at least 50 hospital workers and 19 family members in all were infected.2
    Perhaps the most important transmission chain was to Professor LJL, who
worked at No. 2 Hospital [see next chapter]. His symptoms started on 15 February
(that is, 15 days after the last time he might have been in contact with Mr ZZF),
so he was most likely infected by a hospital worker who had been infected by
Mr ZZF.




                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   135
              FURTHER         TRANSMISSIONS
                    During Mr ZZF’s transfer to No. 3 Hospital, the ambulance driver, two
                doctors, and two nurses were infected. This ambulance driver may have been
                one of the first health-care workers to die from SARS. Within the next eight
                days, 20 more members of the medical staff at No. 3 Hospital were also infected.
                Nineteen members of Mr ZZF’s family also developed SARS.
                    Mr ZZF also infected staff members at Guangzhou No. 8 People’s Hospital,
                where he finally recovered. The hospital’s president, Tang Xiaoping, recalled in
                a television interview: “Doctors and nurses complained. … Why should such
                a critically ill patient be transferred to our hospital?
                                                             “We gave the so-called ‘virus king’ the most
                                                         meticulous care. We didn’t wear masks or
                                                         goggles then. We later found that secretions
                                                         can be infectious if they contact the eyes. We
                                                         had never encountered such a highly
                                                         infectious disease.”3
                                                             The source of Mr ZZF’s infection is not
                                                         known. A retrospective study has confirmed
                                                         that SARS first appeared in Foshan
      A nurse rests inside a special quarantine ward for municipality in Guangdong Province on
      fever patients at a hospital in Guangzhou.
                                                         16 November 2002. 4 There were only
                sporadic cases until late January, when the number of cases spiked. Mr ZZF’s
                contacts added to that increase in early February, after which the number of
                cases in Guangdong tapered off and was already declining by the time of the
                global alert. The relative role of this super-spreading event (from Mr ZZF) in the
                overall epidemic has not been defined, but was clearly substantial.


              WHAT       CAUSES A SUPER-SPREADING EVENT?
                  Early on, it was noted that there were “super spreaders” who passed the virus
              to many other people. This term emphasizes the role of the host (person infected)
              above that of the agent (nature of the virus) and the environment in accounting
              for the phenomenon; hence the preference for the term “super-spreading event”.
              A super-spreading event is likely to derive from the classical explanatory triad
              of host, agent, and environment. However, the mechanism of highly efficient
              transmission of most of the super-spreading events is still largely unknown.




       SARS: How a global
136    epidemic was stopped
  Table 13.1 Selected super-spreading eventsa
  Name             Age      Event or location       Infection event dates Number and place of transmissions
                          (corresponding chapter) Exposure Onset Admit No                   Place
  Mr ZZF           44     Guangdong (13)                ND       26 Jan     30 Jan >69         Probably all in hospitals
  Mr LJL    b
                   64     Hong Kong,                    ND       15 Feb     21 Feb 21          Most in hotel; effective
                          Metropole Hotel (14)                                                 infection control in hospital
  Mr CT            26     Hong Kong,                   21 Feb 24 Feb        4 Mar    144       Probably all in hospital;
                          Prince of Wales Hospital (7)                                         neublization helped spread
  Mr LTC b         33     Hong Kong,                    ND       14 Mar     22 Mar N D         329 through sewage;
                          Amoy Gardens (16)                                                    none while in hospital.
  Ms YM            27     Taiyuan & Beijing (6)         ND       22 Feb     2 Mar    21        Most in hospital; believed to
                                                                                               be family and friends in the
                                                                                               community
  Mr LSK           72     Flight CA112 & Beijing (15)   4-9 Mar 11 Mar      16 Mar 83          24 on the plane; at least 59
                                                                                               in Beijing hospital
  Mr JC b          48     Hanoi (18)                    21 Feb 23 Feb       26 Feb >20         All in hospital, no hospital
                                                                                               transmissions in Hong Kong
                                                                                               (effective infection control)
  Ms EM            22     Singapore (9)                 21 Feb 25 Feb       1 Mar    22        All in hospital; isolated
                                                                                               after 6 days; no further
                                                                                               transmissions
  Ms AB            27     Singapore (9)                 1-6 Mar 7 Mar       10 Mar 21          All, except perhaps one, in
                                                                                               hospital (10 staff, 7 visitors,
                                                                                               3 patients and 1 family
                                                                                               member)
  Ms PAc           53     Singapore (9)                 10 Mar 12 Mar       10 Mar 26          All in hospital (19 staff, 13
                                                                                               patients, 6 visitors and 2
                                                                                               family members)
  Mr TKCc          59     Singapore (9)                 3-20 Mar24 Mar      24 Mar 40          All in hospital
  Mr TSC           64     Singapore (17)                31 Mar 5 Apr        8 Apr    15        In the community and
                                                                                               hospital; before isolation (3
                                                                                               co-workers, 2 taxi drivers, 2
                                                                                               family members, 3 health-
                                                                                               care workers, 4 patients
                                                                                               and 1 visitor)
  Ms MLC           47     Taiwan (8)                    28 Mar 6 Apr        9 Apr    ND        All in hospital, despite
                                                                                               infection control
  Mr CSL bc        42     Taiwan (8)                    9 Apr    12 Apr     16 Apr   ND        Hospital worker;
                                                                                               transmissions not clear


ND, not determined
a
  Events selected based on available data
b
  Patients who died
c
  Patients with pre-existing medical conditions; all presented with atypical symptoms, except Mr LTC




                                                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                                                       epidemic was stopped      137
                  The environment must, first of all, allow transmission. Early isolation and
             appropriate infection control can prevent this. But even supposedly good
             infection control did not stop all transmissions. Presumably, viral loads in some
             patients were high enough to exploit a minor lapse in infection control.
                  In all super-spreading events, infection control was lacking. There was no
             hospital spread from the index cases of the Metropole Hotel and Amoy Gardens
             outbreaks, except for the nurses who did not protect themselves around the
             time of admission of these cases. The Hanoi index case did not transmit any
             infections when he returned to Hong Kong. These cases suggest that with good
             infection control, even highly infectious individuals can be prevented from
             transmitting virus.
                  But lack of infection control alone does not explain super-spreading events.
             Many more cases with little or no infection control were associated with very
             little or no spread.
                  Super-spreading events are likely to be related to either a high viral load in
             the patient or increased efficiency in transmission (e.g. through nebulization)
             or both. What causes a high viral load? Host factors (e.g. old age and pre-
             existing medical conditions) were present in some. But three others in Table
             13.1 were in their 20s and had no known pre-existing medical conditions. Viral
             factors could also explain it, and perhaps super-spreading could be associated
             with specific lineages of the virus. An analysis in China found two distinct
             lineages.5 Most of the super-spreading can probably be traced to a chain of
             transmission that starts with the first super-spreading event in Guangzhou [Figure
             13.1]. But most of the people infected by that virus did not go on to spread
             infection to any others.




      SARS: How a global
138   epidemic was stopped
     Figure 13.1 Chain of transmission for super-spreading events




Source: Data reported to WHO




                                                            SARS: How a global
                                                           epidemic was stopped   139
             REFERENCES
             1
                 Wu W et al. A hospital outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome in
                 Guangzhou, China. Chinese Medical Journal, 2003, 116(6):811–818.
             2
                 Zhong NS et al. Epidemiology and cause of sever acute respiratory syndrome
                 (SARS) in Guangdong in February 2003. The Lancet, 25 October 2003,
                 362(9393):1353–1358.
             3
                 Interview with Tang Xiaoping, president of No.8 People’s Hospital, on China
                 Today. CCTV, May 2003 (http://www.cctv.com/lm/124/31/86426.html).
             4
                 Xu RH et al. Epidemiologic clues to SARS origin in China. Emerging Infectious
                 Diseases, 2004, 10(6): 1030–1037.
             5
                 Breiman RF et al. Role of China in the quest to define and control severe
                 acute respiratory syndrome. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2003, 9(9):1037–
                 1041.




      SARS: How a global
140   epidemic was stopped
     14 SOLVING THE
    METROPOLE HOTEL
         MYSTERY


INDEX CASE
    Professor LJL was a doctor at the No. 2 Affiliated Hospital of Zhongshan
Medical University in Guangzhou City, Guangdong Province, China. Mr ZZF
had brought the virus into that hospital on 30 January [see Chapter 13].
    In mid-February 2003, the 64-year-old physician was working late nights
caring for patients who had developed a strange new form of pneumonia. Like
other doctors fighting the disease, he wore a mask and gloves. But despite his
precautions, he became ill on 15 February.
    He was feeling better when he decided to attend a wedding in Hong Kong
(China), as previously arranged. On 21 February, he and his wife took the three-
hour bus ride south from Guangdong Province to Hong Kong.
    There he checked into room 911 of the Metropole Hotel, one of the countless
three-star hotels that line the roads of the tourist district in Kowloon. He felt
well enough to go shopping later that day. But the next morning, the elderly
doctor woke with a high fever. Instead of going to the wedding he walked to the
nearest hospital, the Kwong Wah Hospital, and was admitted. Professor LJL told
the hospital staff that Guangzhou had many patients with atypical pneumonia
and that he had treated some of them in the outpatient clinic. But his illness was
different, he insisted. He was wrong.
    On 4 March, Professor LJL died of what would later be called SARS. During
his one-night stay at the Metropole Hotel, the SARS virus had passed to at least
16 other guests and one visitor at the hotel. The virus then spread around the
world, leading to outbreaks in other countries. But in early March, none of this
was known.




                                                                      SARS: How a global
                                                                     epidemic was stopped   141
             METROPOLE IDENTIFIED AS SOURCE OF MULTICOUNTRY
             OUTBREAK
                                   Less than a month later, Professor LJL’s stay at the
                               Metropole Hotel would be recognized as a key event. SARS
                               outbreaks in Canada, Hong Kong, Singapore, and Viet Nam
                               were all linked to the 9th floor of the hotel.1 What had
                               happened there?
                                   On 24 February, the Hong Kong Department of Health
                               was notified of Professor LJL’s case of severe community-
                               acquired pneumonia and started an investigation. The
                               Department knew that Professor LJL had stayed at the
                               Metropole, but did not consider this fact significant. The
                               first clue came from Singapore. A day after WHO issued its
                               global alert on 12 March, Singapore reported three cases,
                               all of whom had stayed at the Metropole. This information
  The   Metropole    Hotel  in
  Hong Kong, 22 March 2003.    was shared—as part of another conversation—between a
                               doctor in Singapore’s Ministry of Health and a doctor in the
          Hong Kong Department of Health on 8 March.
               On 13 March, the Department of Health learned of a 72-year-old Canadian
          tourist (Mr AC) with atypical pneumonia who had stayed at the Metropole.
          Then on 18 March, Health Canada, the federal health authority, notified Hong
          Kong by facsimile that the index case for the Toronto outbreak, Ms KSC, had
          stayed at the Metropole. Only then did the Department of Health start reviewing
          all its files on reported cases of severe community-acquired pneumonia.
               By 19 March, the Hong Kong Department of Health knew of seven SARS
          cases who were linked to the 9th floor of the Metropole Hotel. Professor LJL was
          identified as the index case, as he had fallen ill before all the others. All had been
          at the hotel, either staying or visiting on the 9th floor, around the same time as
          Professor LJL. And yet there was no evidence that any of them had been in close
          contact with him. Certainly, none of those infected could recall meeting him.


             HOW       DID THE VIRUS SPREAD?
                “We do not know how the infection took place,” Hong Kong Health Director
             Dr Margaret Chan told reporters. “Perhaps they all stood outside the elevator at
             the same time and someone sneezed or coughed.”2
                Speculation was rife about how Professor LJL could have infected so many
             people in the hotel but left others unaffected during his brief stay. The infection,
             some said, could have been passed on through an elevator button he had touched
             or while walking through the same corridor. Even more frightening, it could
             have gone under hotel-room doors to infect occupants inside [see Figure 14.1].




      SARS: How a global
142   epidemic was stopped
    But if the disease was so infectious, why had it infected fewer than 20 guests
in the nearly 500-room hotel? And why weren’t any members of the hotel staff
affected? Of the 285 in the staff, 170 had regular contact with guests. And what
about those who had cleaned Professor LJL’s room? “A miracle!” was how one
hotel employee explained it. A miracle? Or was there a logical explanation?
And what was the link to the 9th floor?

    Figure 14.1 9th floor of the Metropole Hotel, 21 February 2003




THE INFECTED GUESTS AND VISITOR
   While the cause of the disease was being identified, investigators were tracing
the viral transmission chains that started at the Metropole Hotel. Fourteen guests
and one visitor with SARS who were at the hotel on the night of 21 February
were identified [see Table 14.1]. Two of those infected died: the index cases for
Hanoi (Mr JC) and Toronto (Ms KSC).
   All those infected, except Mr CKL, were on the 9th floor. The hotel staff told
the WHO team that the guests in 909 had complained about the coughing in
room 911 and had been transferred to room 1409 on the night of 21 February.
But there was no record of this move at the hotel and Mr CKL does not recall the
incident.

                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   143
         Table 14.1 People infected at the Metropole Hotel and consequences of their infectiona
                  Personal details                  Hotel stay               Disease event dates                Number directly
                         Age From             Room        Dates           Onset          Admit     Place             infected

          Mr JC        47     USA            910       21-23 Feb          23 Feb       26 Feb     Hanoi                    >20
          Mr CT        26     Hong Kong      906b      18-23 Feb          24 Feb       4 Mar      Hong Kong                143
          Mr CKW       51     USA            908       19-23 Feb          24 Feb       NA         Hong Kong                 0
          Ms CHC        42    Canada         907       19-22 Feb          24 Feb       6 Mar      Guangzhou                ND
          Ms CJP       36     USA            917       19-22 Feb          24 Feb       2 Mar      USA                       0
          Ms LYC       33     Singapore      915       20-25 Feb          25 Feb       3 Mar      Singapore                0
          Ms EM        22     Singapore      938       21-25 Feb          25 Feb       1 Mar      Singapore                22
          Ms KSC       78     Canada         904       18-23 Feb          25 Feb       NA         Toronto                  4
          Mr TJH       37     UK             925       18-23 Feb          25 Feb       5 Mar      Philippines              0
          Mr CHC       40     Canada         907       19-22 Feb          26 Feb       6 Mar      Guangzhou                ND
          Mr CKL       55     Canada         1409      20-24 Feb          26 Feb       7 Mar      Vancouver                0
          Ms CA c      26     Germany        ND        21-22 Feb          26 Feb       NA         Australia                0
          Mr AC        72     Canada         902       20 Feb-2 Mar       27 Feb       2 Mar      Hong Kong                9
          Ms EMH       33     UK             925       18-23 Feb          27 Feb       6 Mar      Philippines              0
          Ms CJE       22     Singapore      938       21-25 Feb          28 Feb       2 Mar      Singapore                0


             ND, not determined; NA, not applicable
             a
               Two additional guests who were infected on 21 February are not included as details are not available. One
             hotel guest infected in March is also not included, but detailed in the text.
             b
               Mr CT visited a friend in room 906 for those dates; he did not stay there.
             c
               Ms CA recalls staying on the ninth floor, but her room number has not been determined.



                Follow-up studies of the people who were staying at the Metropole later
             identified two other people who were infected,3 bringing the total infected on
             21 February to at least 17 people. One other guest (Mr VCC) who stayed on the
             9th floor also developed SARS. But since he arrived at the hotel on 1 March and
             his symptoms did not develop until 13 March, he may have got the virus from
             one of the three infected guests who were still in the hotel at the time; the
             source of his infection is not clear. Mr VCC’s wife was also infected, most likely
             by Mr VCC, as her symptoms started six days later than his.
                Most of those infected at the hotel did not pass on the virus. But the impact
             of four infections was dramatic—starting SARS outbreaks outside mainland
             China, in Hanoi, Hong Kong, Singapore, and Toronto.
                Professor LJL had also passed on the virus to his wife, daughter, brother-in-
             law, and one nurse at the Kwong Wah Hospital. The nurse was in the cubicle
             next to him during his admission, and had no direct contact with him. The
             other hospital workers complied fully with infection-control measures during
             his stay. No one was infected.




      SARS: How a global
144   epidemic was stopped
THE NEXT GENERATION OF SPREAD
    Mr JC from room 908 would take the virus to Hanoi and trigger the outbreak
of 63 cases there, leading to the first alert about the new disease [see Figure 14.2].
    Ms KSC, the 78-year-old Canadian, would return to Toronto and pass the
virus on to four other members of her family before she died, without going to
hospital. Through her family, Ms KSC would be the index case for the first
Canadian cluster of 136 cases.
    Three Singapore women were infected at the Metropole (they had stayed in
rooms 915 and 938). All three were hospitalized within a day of one another,
two in the same hospital, and yet only one (Ms EM) transmitted the virus, sparking
the Singapore outbreak. Of 238 cases in Singapore, 195 had a contact history
leading back to this one index case.
    Mr AC, a 72-year-old Canadian in room 902, was admitted to St Paul’s Hospital
in Hong Kong, where nine of his contacts developed SARS.
    But of all those infected at the Metropole, it was a local who passed on the
virus to the most number of people. Mr CT, a 26-year-old airport worker, was
not a guest at the hotel. However, he had to walk past room 911 to visit his
friend in room 906. He thought little of this incident and did not mention it to
investigators until 19 March. In all, 143 of his contacts had been infected, all of
them at the Prince of Wales Hospital, where he was admitted on 4 March.


OUTBREAKS THAT COULD HAVE BEEN
   A British-Filipino couple (Mr TJH and Ms EMH) were infected during their
stay in room 925. They developed symptoms later, while travelling in the
Philippines, and were hospitalized there on 5 and 6 March. Tests on their return
to the United Kingdom were positive, but none of those they had come in
contact with showed symptoms.
   A German woman (Ms CA) who stayed at the Metropole on the night of
21 February travelled on to Australia, where she developed fever and respiratory
symptoms. She was seen by a general practitioner, but was not admitted. On
her return home, she tested positive for SARS.4 But her travelling companion
showed no sign of infection. Nor were there any other transmissions among all
her contacts, including the doctor who treated her.
   These three people could have set off outbreaks in Australia and the
Philippines, but they didn’t. Was it because their infection was milder and they
had fewer close contacts? But the Filipino woman in particular had many contacts
while she had symptoms. She had also received nebulizer treatment in the
hospital, and that would have spread any droplets widely. Perhaps some people,
even though infected, are not infectious.




                                                                          SARS: How a global
                                                                         epidemic was stopped   145
                         Figure 14.2 Spread of virus from the Metropole Hotel




                 In the case of 55-year-old Mr CKL, he may have been hospitalized early
             enough and immediately and effectively isolated in Vancouver so he could not
             infect others. Or he may simply have been one of the many people who did not
             transmit the virus for reasons that are still unknown.




      SARS: How a global
146   epidemic was stopped
WHO ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH TEAM INVESTIGATES
    The WHO team of environmental health experts from Health Canada that
arrived in late April to investigate the environmental spread at Amoy Gardens
[see Chapter 16] also investigated the outbreak at the Metropole. The Hong
Kong Department of Health had started an environmental investigation of the
hotel right after identifying the link on 19 March. No potential sources had
been found in the building’s plumbing, as well as its heating, air-conditioning,
and ventilation systems.
    The WHO team reported their findings on 16 May, at the same press
conference where they released their report on the outbreak in Amoy Gardens.
They had found traces of genetic material of the SARS virus in eight of 154 samples
taken mostly on the 9th floor. Four of the eight positive samples were from the
air inlet of the recirculating elevator lobby fan on the 9th floor. The samples
taken outside guest rooms 908, 909, 910, and 911 (carpet, door sills, etc.) were
also positive. Other sites tested, including the interior of room 911, where
Professor LJL had stayed, yielded no traces of the virus. No live virus was found
anywhere.
    Professor LJL had returned to the hotel in the evening of 21 February after
having dinner. The WHO team speculated that he might have contaminated
the area of the corridor near his room by vomiting, spitting, or coughing heavily.
As there was no record of hotel staff having been called to clean up vomit, his
wife, the team said, could have cleaned it up herself, using water and a damp
rag but no sanitizer. “The infectious agent would now reside in the damp carpet,”
the team went on to conjecture, “protected for quite some time by the high
level of humidity of the hotel environment (over 80% relative humidity).”
    Professor LJL’s infected body fluids must have been aerosolized, as indicated
by the traces on the inlet of the elevator lobby fan. Anyone who stepped out of
the 9th floor lift shortly after the event would have been exposed, while those
who walked past room 911 may have been at risk for a longer period. Presumably,
by the morning there was no longer any viable virus, or else the staff had quickly
disinfected the area without becoming exposed. It certainly appears that only
those who were on the 9th floor that night were at risk. Thus, the “miracle” of
none of the hotel staff getting SARS could simply have been due to their not
having been exposed to the virus.
    The rooms in the hotel, atypically, were pressurized; so infected aerosols
could not have entered from the corridor. The WHO team dismissed theories
that the virus was transmitted through elevators, door handles, or handrails. “In
this hotel, these are unlikely scenarios,” the report said, “because other guests
would have made similar contacts, and indeed, staff would have had intense
exposure risk. Staff who served the subject floor did not get infected.”5




                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   147
                The contamination occurred in the corridor of one wing of one floor, and
             never moved up or down the building or endangered people inside their rooms.


             REFERENCES
             1
                 Update: Outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome – worldwide, 2003.
                 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 2003, 52(11):226–228.
             2
                 Crampton T. Killer flu is traced to a hotel in Hong Kong. International Herald
                 Tribune, 20 March 2003.
             3
                 Jones JD et al and the International Hotel M Study Group. A Cohort Study of
                 SARS Coronavirus Transmission in a Hong Kong Hotel, 2003. [submitted for
                 publication, 2005]
             4
                 Radun D et al. SARS: retrospective cohort study among German guests of the
                 Hotel “M”, Hong Kong. Euro Surveillance, 2003, 8(12):228–230.
             5
                 Tilgner I et al. Final report: Metropole Hotel, WHO Environmental Investigation.
                 Geneva, World Health Organization, July 2003 (http://www.iapmo.org/
                 common/pdf/ISS-Rome/SARS_Metropole_Hotel_HK.pdf, accessed 1 April
                 2005).




      SARS: How a global
148   epidemic was stopped
  15 FLIGHT CA112:
FACING THE SPECTRE
    OF IN-FLIGHT
   TRANSMISSION


INDEX CASE
    Mr LSK, a 72-year-old from Beijing, looked pale and sick. He asked a flight
attendant for water to take some pills. But nothing appeared out of the ordinary
on China Airlines flight 112 from Hong Kong to Beijing on 15 March 2003. No
one on the apparently routine three-hour flight knew it yet, as the meal was
served and a movie shown, but the SARS virus was in the plane … and spreading.
    Mr LSK had been in Hong Kong (China) from 26 December 2002. His elder
brother was in Ward 8A of the Prince of Wales Hospital with Salmonella infection
from 4 March and died on 9 March. Mr LSK regularly visited him at the hospital.
The index case of the Prince of Wales Hospital outbreak was in Ward 8A at the
same time; at least 143 of his contacts developed SARS. One of these contacts
was Mr LSK; another was Mr LSK’s niece, who also visited the ward. Mr LSK
developed fever on 11 March and saw a doctor on 14 March, with fever, chills,
rigor, cough, and shortness of breath. The doctor advised him to go to hospital,
but Mr LSK wanted to return to Beijing on his previously booked flight the next
day, 15 March.
    On arrival in Beijing he went to a hospital but was not admitted. The next
day he was taken to another hospital, where he was resuscitated in the emergency
department and admitted. He died there on 20 March, having passed the virus
to at least 59 other people in Beijing (three family members, seven or eight
members of the hospital staff, other patients and their visitors).1


THE FLIGHT
   Flight CA112 on 15 March was a Boeing 737-300 aircraft, which can typically
carry up to 126 passengers.2 On this flight there were 112 passengers and eight



                                                                     SARS: How a global
                                                                    epidemic was stopped   149
                                Figure 15.1 Schematic diagram of flight CA112




             Adapted, by permission of the publisher, from Olsen SJ et al 2


             crew members. At least 22 passengers and two crew members developed SARS,
             raising the spectre of international spread through air travel [see Figure 15.1].


             FIRST DETECTION AND ALERT
                On 23 March, a Hong Kong hospital (Tuen Mun) notified the Department of
             Health that a couple had been admitted the day before with fever that started
             on 18 March. This couple had been part of a 36-person group (including one
             guide) that had gone to Beijing on a five-day tour. As other cases came to light,
             the Department of Health issued a press release on 25 March calling on passengers
             on flight CA112 of 15 March and the tour group’s return flight, CA115 of
             19 March, to contact the Department.3 None of the passengers on CA115 had
             been infected. But 10 people in the tour group and three other Hong Kong
             travellers on flight CA112 developed SARS. Eleven of them started showing
             symptoms between 17 and 20 March, and the two others on 23 March, suggesting
             a common source of exposure [see Table 15.1].




      SARS: How a global
150   epidemic was stopped
    Table 15.1 Passengers infected during flight CA112
                                                                                      Disease event dates
                                          Sex        Age        Seat        Onset          Admit       Death
      Hong Kong tour group 1              F          51         13C         17 Mar         24 Mar
      Chinese official 1                  M          41                     18 Mar         21 Mara
      Crew member 1 (Ms MCY)              F                                 18 Mar
      Hong Kong resident 1                M          41         10F         18 Mar         21 Mar      16 Apr
      Hong Kong tour group 2              M          44         13F         18 Mar         22 Mar
      Hong Kong tour group 3              F          44         13E         18 Mar         22 Mar      3 May
      Hong Kong tour group 4              F          32         9F          18 Mar         23 Mar
      Hong Kong tour group 5              M          33         16A         18 Mar         23 Mar      13 Jun
      Hong Kong tour group 6              F          27         7C          18 Mar         23 Mar
      Hong Kong tour group 7              M          48         14B         18 Mar         23 Mar
      Taiwan resident 1                   M          43         9D          18 Mar         26 Mar
      Hong Kong tour group 8              M          61         17B         19 Mar         24 Mar      25 Apr
      Chinese official 2                  M                                 19 Mar
      China resident 1                    M          29                     19 Mar
      China resident 2                    M          50                     19 Mar
      Crew member 2                       F                                 19 Mar
      Singapore resident                  F          29         11C         19 Mar         26 Mar      4 Apr
      Taiwan resident 2                   F          29         12A         19 Mar         26 Mar
      Taiwan resident 3                   M          37         12C         19 Mar         26 Mar
      Hong Kong resident 2                F          29         19F         20 Mar         27 Mar
      Hong Kong resident 3                M          36         16B         20 Mar         23 Mar
      Taiwan resident 4                   M          47         12D         21 Mar         26 Mar
      Hong Kong tour group 9              F          50         7B          23 Mar         23 Mar
      Hong Kong tour group 10             F          31         10E         23 Mar         27 Mar

a
 Passenger was hospitalized in Bangkok on 21 March, but discharged himself and was hospitalized again in Beijing.
Source: Olsen SJ et al 2



SPREAD         OF VIRUS
T AIPEI
   Seven employees of a Taiwanese engineering firm had been on flight CA112,
before returning to Taipei on 21 March. As their laboratory results confirmed,
four of them developed SARS, first showing symptoms between 18 and
21 March. But they were admitted only on 26 March after Hong Kong authorities
had issued the advisory about flight CA112. Taiwan health authorities scrambled
to trace their contacts, including the other passengers on their return flight to
Taipei, but none had caught the virus.

SINGAPORE
   Ms CPL, a 29-year-old woman from Singapore who was on flight CA112,
became the fourth person to import SARS to Singapore (the first three had been

                                                                                                   SARS: How a global
                                                                                                  epidemic was stopped   151
             infected at the Metropole Hotel). She developed symptoms on 19 March while
             in Beijing. By the time she returned home on flight CZ355 from Beijing on
             26 March she was very ill. From the airport she went straight to Tan Tock Seng
             Hospital, the SARS-designated hospital. She died on 4 April. The Singapore
             authorities faced a huge challenge in tracking all the other passengers on that
             flight, armed only with their names and nationalities. But none of those became
             ill, nor did the taxi driver who took her from the airport to the hospital.

             BEIJING   VIA   BANGKOK; ILO   OFFICIAL DIES

                 Two Chinese officials who had been on flight CA112 flew on to Bangkok on
             17 March. One of them became ill on 18 March and was admitted to hospital
             on 21 March, but discharged himself. On 23 March, both officials boarded
             flight TG614 to Beijing, where they would later be reported as SARS cases.
             Sitting next to them on that flight was Mr PA, a 52-year-old Finnish official of
             the International Labour Organisation (ILO). Mr PA developed symptoms on
             28 March and died on 5 April.
                 Mr PA was the first foreigner to develop SARS in China. He had gone from
             perfect health to death in a matter of days, and had no obvious contact history.
             He had been in Bangkok since 18 March, and Europe before that. In neither
             place was there any transmission of SARS. But he recalled the fact that his
             neighbour on the flight was ill, shivery, and covered by blankets. Mr PA’s death
             greatly affected the international community in Beijing. It may also have
             contributed to China’s perception of SARS as a global concern that needed
             intense control efforts.
                 Two other Chinese people who developed SARS were later identified as
             passengers on flight CA112. Both developed symptoms on 19 March and were
             hospitalized in Beijing.

             INNER MONGOLIA AUTONOMOUS REGION, CHINA
                In China, Ms MCY, a flight attendant on CA112, began feeling sick on the
             morning of 18 March. But she kept working and a few days later, still feeling ill,
             returned to her home in Hohhot, the capital of the Chinese autonomous region
             of Inner Mongolia.
                From Ms MCY, the virus passed to three family members and her doctor in
             Hohhot, as well as to a close friend, who later became one of the first in Inner
             Mongolia to die of SARS. “We were told atypical pneumonia was finished in
             February,” Ms MCY said when interviewed by The New York Times. “I never
             imagined that this kind of tragedy would fall on me and my family and take
             away the person dearest to me.”4
                Health authorities later traced most of Inner Mongolia’s 290 SARS cases to
             Ms MCY and the other flight attendant who had been infected on flight CA112.
             And from Inner Mongolia, the virus spread to Mongolia [see Chapter 11].


      SARS: How a global
152   epidemic was stopped
IMPACT OF EVENT: EXIT SCREENING
    On 27 March 2003, WHO recommended new measures to reduce the risk
of further international spread of SARS. In areas with local transmission of the
virus, passengers taking international flights should be asked whether they had
fever or respiratory symptoms and contacts with possible SARS cases. Their
temperature should also be checked. National authorities in those areas were
encouraged to advise travellers with fever to postpone travel until they felt better.5
    In contrast to entry screening, which many countries introduced at
considerable cost and with little apparent benefit, exit screening may have helped
prevent the spread of SARS.6


TRANSMISSION           ON OTHER FLIGHTS
    By 22 May, WHO had analysed the outcome of 35 flights with probable
SARS cases on board. Virus spread occurred on only four of these flights.7 Of
the 29 people who were infected on these
flights, 24 were on CA112.
    The first flight with SARS transmission was
flight SQ25 [see 15 March in Chapter 1]. A
33-year-old physician who had treated the
Singapore index case developed symptoms on
9 March, while attending a medical
conference in New York. His 31-year-old wife
and 62-year-old mother-in-law were with
him. His wife had started showing symptoms        Passengers are seen on a thermal screen used to
on the flight; his mother-in-law, on the day      take the temperatures of all the travellers leaving
of departure. Therefore, they could not have      Changi International Airport in Singapore.

been infected on the flight. Only one person was infected in-flight: a 22-year-
old female flight attendant (her symptoms began on 18 March). None of the
other passengers (82 in Frankfurt and 28 in Singapore) or the attendants at the
medical conference in New York developed SARS.8 The second flight with SARS
transmission was flight CA112. The third was flight AF171 of 22 March, from
Hanoi to Paris (via Bangkok). Here the source case was a French physician at
the French-Hanoi Hospital who had examined a colleague with SARS on 16
and 17 March without any respiratory protection. He was hospitalized on the
day of arrival in Paris. Of the three people infected on that flight, the only one
who had clearly come in contact with the source case was the 40-year-old
female flight attendant (onset 30 March) who served him on the Hanoi-to-Bangkok
leg. The other two were a 55-year old male passenger (onset 26 March) sitting
one row ahead and to the right, and a 26-year-old male passenger (onset 29
March) sitting four rows behind the source case.8




                                                                               SARS: How a global
                                                                              epidemic was stopped      153
                 The fourth and last flight with SARS transmission was flight TG614, where
             the ILO’s Mr PA became infected after sitting next to a person who was infected
             on CA112 [see above]. Except possibly for flight AF171, and flight CA112, where
             the mode of transmission is still unclear, all in-flight transmissions were limited
             to people who had direct contact with the source case.
                 After the 27 March travel advisory, there were no transmissions of SARS on
             flights despite at least 21 flights with probable SARS cases on board.9 The advice
             from national authorities and exit screening had kept people with SARS symptoms
             from travelling. But more than this, it appears that what happened on CA112
             was unique. Why was this flight the only one where a person with SARS symptoms
             infected so many others? Was it simply because the virus replicated with high
             efficiency in Mr LSK? But how was the virus transmitted on this flight? No one
             knows.


             REFERENCES
             1
                 Liang W et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome, Beijing, 2003. Emerging
                 Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10(1): 25–31.
             2
                 Olsen SJ et al. Transmission of the severe acute respiratory syndrome on aircraft.
                 New England Journal of Medicine, 2003, 349(25):2416–2422.
             3
                 Health surveillance for airline passengers. Hong Kong Special Administrative
                 Region of the People’s Republic of China, Government Information Centre,
                 25 March 2003 (http://www.info.gov.hk/gia/general/200303/25/0325228.htm,
                 accessed 1 April 2005).
             4
                 Kahn J. Even in remote China, SARS arrives in force. The New York Times,
                 22 April 2003.
             5
                 WHO recommends new measures to prevent travel-related spread of SARS.
                 Geneva, World Health Organization, 27 March 2003 (http://www.who.int/
                 csr/don/2003_03_27/en/, accessed 1 April 2005).
             6
                 Bell DM, World Health Organization Working Group on Prevention of
                 International and Community Transmission of SARS. Public health interventions
                 and SARS spread, 2003. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10 (11): 1900–
                 1906.
             7
                 More than 8000 cases reported globally, situation in Taiwan, data on in-flight
                 transmission, report on Henan Province, China. Geneva, World Health
                 Organization, 22 May 2003 (http://www.who.int/csr/don/2003_05_22/en/,
                 accessed 1 April 2005).
             8
                 Desenclos JC et al. Introduction of SARS in France, March–April, 2003.
                 Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10(2):195–200.
             9
                 Consensus document on the epidemiology of severe acute respiratory syndrome
                 (SARS). Geneva, World Health Organization, 2003 (WHO/CDS/CSR/GAR/
                 2003.11).


      SARS: How a global
154   epidemic was stopped
     16 LOCKDOWN AT
      AMOY GARDENS


    Police in surgical masks surrounded the block in the dead of night. While
the officers secured the area with metal barricades and tape, health workers in
full protective gear guarded the door to the high-rise. No one was allowed to go
in or come out. Other officials began piling food and supplies near the entrance
for those locked inside.
    Like a scene out of a movie, this building in the Amoy
Gardens apartment complex in Hong Kong (China) was
quarantined on 31 March 2003. The eerie news footage
of the masked government officials surrounding the
buildings sent shock waves around the world and brought
home to people everywhere the deadly impact of SARS.
    Hong Kong, one of Asia’s most prosperous and
progressive cities, was forced to use drastic measures to
control the outbreak. “We are imposing restrictions on
personal freedoms,” said Secretary for Health, Welfare
and Food Dr Yeoh Eng-kiong. “This is something we have
never done before and hope never to do again in the
future.”1
    SARS seemed to be entering a new, more frightening
phase. Until then, infections had been largely limited to
                                                             Health workers stand outside
close contacts, mostly in hospital. Now, it appeared that Block E of Amoy Gardens. Over
an environmental source was leading to an explosive 100 residents were infected
                                                             with the virus and over 200
outbreak. Could Hong Kong control its spread? First, the others quarantined in isolated
nature of this unusual outbreak had to be understood.        holiday camps.


INDEX CASE
    The index case was identified as Mr LTC, a 33-year-old with autoimmune
kidney disease. He lived and worked in Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, but
visited Hong Kong twice a week for dialysis at the Prince of Wales Hospital.
Each time he would stay with his brother who lived in Block E, one of 14




                                                                      SARS: How a global
                                                                     epidemic was stopped   155
             apartment blocks in the Amoy Gardens complex, which was built in 1981. The
             complex has about 19,000 residents.
                 Mr LTC had fever and diarrhoea when he stayed with his brother on the
             night of 14 March 2003. During his dialysis the next day, his condition worsened
             and he was transferred to Ward 8A, which had been used since 13 March for
             cases of suspected atypical pneumonia.
                 He responded to medical treatment (including an anti-influenza drug) and
             was discharged on 19 March. None of the control and follow-up measures for
             SARS cases was implemented, as the diagnosis, based on the isolated virus, was
             influenza. He returned to Prince of Wales Hospital on 22 March for his scheduled
             dialysis. On admission, his condition deteriorated rapidly, and he was diagnosed
             with SARS on 27 March.
                 Mr LTC had stayed overnight in his brother’s unit in Amoy Gardens after
             being discharged from hospital on 19 March, just as he had on 14 March. He
             may have transmitted the virus at either or both visits, but the onset dates of the
             other cases makes it more likely that the virus spread on 19 March. He may
             have been infected with SARS in Prince of Wales Hospital or in Shenzhen; the
             source of his infection is not known.



                        Figure 16.1 Epidemic curve of Amoy Gardens outbreak,
                                         cases by onset date




              Source: Data reported to WHO




      SARS: How a global
156   epidemic was stopped
    Mr LTC’s brother and his brother’s wife developed SARS, with the brother
first showing symptoms on 23 March and his wife on 28 March. Two nurses
who attended Mr LTC at the dialysis session on 22 March were also infected,
and both developed symptoms on 26 March [see Figure 16.1]. These cases of
infection following close contact were to be expected, but the Amoy Gardens
outbreak was to involve a total of 329 residents, 42 of whom died. And they
had got the virus in an entirely unprecedented way.


THE OUTBREAK STARTS—AND IS CONFINED
    The first alert was raised on 26 March 2003,
when 15 residents of Amoy Gardens were
reportedly admitted to the United Christian
Hospital with suspected SARS. Immediately, the
Hong Kong Department of Health sent a team
to investigate the common exposure for these
cases. None was found. All residents of the
complex were warned of the outbreak so that
they could be on the alert for symptoms and, Police officers wearing masks for protection from
once these appeared, they could be isolated SARS patrol the grounds of Amoy Gardens.
                                                  Block E residents were quarantined for 10 days
and treated early. Daily inspections at Amoy in isolated holiday camps.
Gardens continued. Still the number of cases
continued to rise, mostly in Block E.
    On 29 March, a multidisciplinary team from the Department of Health and
the Environment, Transport and Works Bureau looked into possible
environmental factors. The next day, the Hong Kong SARS Task Force discussed
the outbreak and recommended isolating Block E residents. The 1936 Quarantine
and Prevention of Disease Ordinance, revised on 27 March to include SARS,
empowered the Department of Health to do just that.
    In the early morning of 31 March, an isolation order was issued to Block E.
Over 240 residents were told that they could not leave the building for 10 days
and that they would be hospitalized if they showed symptoms of SARS. Failure
to comply could mean prosecution. Many residents fled the building before the
area could be sealed off. “Those who have left must contact us,” appealed
Dr Yeoh Eng-kiong. “Every infected person has the potential to cause another
big outbreak like the one at Amoy Gardens.”2
    Locking down Block E was a massive, swift operation involving more than
100 officers from the Departments of Health, Police, Home Affairs, and Social
Welfare. Officers went from door to door to serve the notices, explain the need
for isolation, and serve meals. The aim, they said, was to protect public health,
as well as the health of the residents.




                                                                            SARS: How a global
                                                                           epidemic was stopped    157
              IS   THE VIRUS SPREADING THROUGH THE ENVIRONMENT?
                                                        By the end of the day on 31 March,
                                                     213 residents of Amoy Gardens had been
                                                     admitted to hospital, 107 of them from Block
                                                     E. Each housing block in Amoy Gardens
                                                     typically has 33 floors. Each floor has eight
                                                     units, arranged in pairs [see Figure 16.2]. Most
                                                     of the cases from Block E were from units 7
                                                     and 8, which were next to each other,
                                                     suggesting vertical spread. But how had it
                                                     occurred?
      A resident of Amoy Gardens carries his luggage    On 1 April, new information from field
      as he leaves the estate. The Government
      quarantined the housing block in early April.  investigations pointed to the building’s sewage
                                                     system as a potential source of the outbreak. It
               was then decided that the residents should be immediately evacuated to prevent
               further exposure. By early evening the evacuation had started.
                    All the Block E residents were to be moved to two holiday camps (Lady
               MacLehose Holiday Village and Lei Yue Mun Park and Holiday Village) that the
               Government had turned into quarantine centres. Evacuation was made more
               challenging by the need to maintain quarantine. But with help from the residents
               themselves, everyone—all 247 residents from 115 households in Block E—was
               moved to the centres by the early hours of 2 April.
                    The evacuation strategy succeeded in ending the outbreak. After 1 April
               there were only five new cases among Block E residents. Three were household
               contacts of previous cases, one was exposed to the virus in hospital, and the
               fifth may have been exposed in travel to Shenzhen.


              TWO TEAMS INVESTIGATE THE OUTBREAK
                  Dr Thomas Tsang Ho-fai, the Department of Health consultant who had
              helped investigate the outbreak, described the investigations as “fishing
              expeditions” after the team had established a common source for the outbreak.
              He said, “We looked at water tanks; we were looking at cockroaches and
              rodents.”3
                  Director of Health Dr Margaret Chan explained that preliminary findings
              had ruled out a common exposure (through travel or at a banquet or meeting),
              bioterrorism, and contaminated water or refuse. But positive samples from some
              rats and cockroach samples made it necessary to look into the sewage system.4
                  On 17 April 2003, the Department of Health investigators concluded that
              several factors were behind the outbreak. The same conclusions were reached
              by a WHO team of environmental experts, who arrived on 27 April and submitted
              their report on 16 May. The team came to assist the Department of Health in


       SARS: How a global
158    epidemic was stopped
investigating the risk factors that made
environmental transmission of SARS more likely
in several residential buildings including Amoy
Gardens and the Metropole Hotel [see Chapter 14].
    The WHO team was composed of four experts
from Health Canada: Dr Heinz Feldmann, an
infectious disease specialist and microbiologist;
Immo Tilgner, an engineer specializing in
mechanical building systems; Allen Grolla, a
laboratory technician with expertise in technical
sampling and molecular detection of viruses; and
Dr Ramon Flick, a virologist with expertise in
mechanical virology sampling and virus isolation
from different samples.
    Working closely with Hong Kong health
officials, the team made an exhaustive examination
of the plumbing, heating, ventilation, and air-
conditioning systems at Amoy Gardens. In all, they Exterior of Block E, Amoy Gardens

analysed 143 samples from the building. They found no genetic material from
the SARS virus.


WHAT     CAUSED THE OUTBREAK?
    WHO experts concluded that an odd combination of factors had conspired
to spread SARS through the building. First, the index case very likely had a high
viral load in his faeces because of his medical condition. Second, bathroom
drain traps had dried out or been removed, creating an open path for aerosol or
droplets to enter the units via drains in the bathroom floor. Third, many residents
had bought bathroom exhaust fans that were six to ten times more powerful
than needed for use in a small space. These fans, when run with the bathroom
door closed, could draw air from the waste pipe through the floor drain.
Contaminated exhaust air from nearby bathroom vents could also have carried
droplets from adjoining bathrooms via the light well, releasing contaminants
through an open window on one floor, and transferring such contaminants into
other living units several floors away.
    Another factor that may have contributed to the spread of virus was the
shutdown of flush water for 16 hours on the evening of 21 March, to allow a
broken pipe to be fixed. Many residents were forced to use a bucket to flush
their toilets. “Bucket flushing did most likely increase aerosol/droplet formation
within the bathroom of the occupants and thus could have contributed to an
increased infectious dose,” the WHO report concluded. As the virus has been
found to survive in stool for at least two days, virus may have survived from the



                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   159
                        Figure 16.2 Typical floor plan of Block E, Amoy Gardens




               Source: WHO investigation team


             overnight stay of the index case on 19 March. The team also found that the virus
             survived better in fresh water, which was used in bucket flushing, as opposed to
             seawater, which is generally used for toilet flushing in the building. However,
             transmission through the sewage system cannot explain the spread to other
             buildings. Transmission through airflow has been suggested as another possible
             mechanism [Figure 16.3].5


             DID     RATS OR COCKROACHES PLAY A PART?
                The team largely ruled out transmission via pests such as rats or cockroaches.
             “Rodents and cockroaches are rather passive carriers, meaning that they pick
             the virus up from contaminated surfaces or from aerosols/droplets,” the report
             noted. “Thus, there is the possibility of transmission of infectious material via
             these passive carriers. However, the dramatic course of the epidemic does not
             favour this being the main mechanism of transmission.”6



      SARS: How a global
160   epidemic was stopped
                      Figure 16.3 Spread of virus from Block E
                          to other blocks in Amoy Gardens




Source: WHO investigation team



LIFE AFTER sars
   At Amoy Gardens, life goes on. But for those who have recovered from the
disease, life after SARS is anything but normal. “When I visit other people’s
homes,” said one who now suffers from post-traumatic depression, “they always
want me to leave as soon as possible.”7


REFERENCES
1
    Crampton T. 80 new SARS cases bring quarantine in Hong Kong. International
    Herald Tribune, 31 March 2003.
2
    [Anonymous]. Hong Kong seals off apartments when virus cases soar. Reuters,
    31 March 2003 (http://yourhealth.stlukesonline.org/HealthNews/reuters/
    NewsStory0331200315.htm).
3
    Tsang H-F. Testimony before Legislative Council Select Committee to inquire
    into the handling of the severe acute respiratory syndrome outbreak by the
    government and the Hospital Authority, 7 February 2004.



                                                                    SARS: How a global
                                                                   epidemic was stopped   161
             4
                 Chan M. Testimony before the Legislative Council Select Committee to inquire
                 into the handling of the severe acute respiratory syndrome outbreak by the
                 government and the Hospital Authority, 13 January 2004.
             5
                 Ignatius TS et al. Evidence of airborne transmission of the severe acute
                 respiratory sysndrome virus. The New England Journal of Medicine, 2004,
                 350: 1731-1739.
             6
                 Tilgner I et al. Final report : Metropole Hotel, WHO Environmental
                 Investigation. Geneva, World Health Organization, July 2003 (http://
                 www.iapmo.org/common/pdf/ISS-Rome/SARS_Metropole_Hotel_HK.pdf,
                 accessed 1 April 2005).
             7
                 Lee K. The estate where normal life is a dream. South China Morning Post,
                 11 March 2004 (City):3.




      SARS: How a global
162   epidemic was stopped
    17 PANIC IN PASIR
    PANJANG MARKET


INDEX CASE
    Singapore was in the midst of the SARS crisis when 64-year-old Mr TSC
visited his brother (Mr TKC) in Ward 58 at Singapore General Hospital on
31 March 2003. Mr TKC was the index case of the SARS outbreak at that hospital,
but because of his atypical symptoms and other medical conditions, his infection
had not yet been recognized. On 5 April, Mr TSC began feeling unwell. But still
he and his wife took their usual early-morning taxi ride from their suburban
home in a high-rise flat on Choa Chu Kang Avenue 4 to the Pasir Panjang
Wholesale Market, where he was a vegetable dealer.
    On 8 April, feeling too ill to continue his daily routine, Mr TSC went to the
emergency department of Singapore’s National University Hospital. Twelve hours
later he was moved into isolation. By then, he had become the index patient for
a SARS outbreak that put more than a thousand people into quarantine and sent
government health officials on a frantic mission to trace the chain of contacts.


THE    VIRUS SPREADS
    On the day that Mr TSC was hospitalized, a 45-year-old colleague at the
Pasir Panjang market began feeling ill. Over an eight-day period, he would visit
five different clinics seeking treatment before he was isolated at the Tan Tock
Seng Hospital, which was specifically designated for SARS patients.
    On 10 April, Mr TSC’s wife was admitted, and two days later Mr TSC died.
Two taxi drivers, colleagues at the market, and several relatives had been infected.
Most had no idea they were carrying the virus.
    By 20 April, the potential gravity of the situation had become clear. “As time
goes on and as each infection wave continues, we will find it more and more
difficult to track an infection to a source,” Health Minister Lim Hng Kiang told
reporters.1 The Health Ministry put out a notice asking people who had visited
the market between 5 and 19 April and felt sick to call a special SARS hotline.
The Government also decided to take its strongest action yet to stem the infections
originating from the market.


                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                       epidemic was stopped   163
              GOVERNMENT CLOSES MARKET, TRACES CONTACTS, AND
              QUARANTINES MORE THAN 1,000
                                                          On the evening of 19 April, dozens of
                                                       police officers wearing surgical masks cleared
                                                       the market of people and built barricades to
                                                       seal off the area. The next day, the Government
                                                       announced that Singapore’s largest wholesale
                                                       vegetable market would be closed for 10 days
                                                       and more than 1,000 people would be
                                                       quarantined at home. Those who defied the
                                                       orders would be fined or imprisoned, the
                                                       Health Ministry said.
                                                          By 23 April, health officials had linked eight
      More than 1,000 tenants and workers were tracked
                                                       probable and 14 suspect SARS cases to the
      down and put under home quarantine.
                                                       market. They suspected there might be more.
               Senior government officials made it clear that the public had to take an active
               part in stemming the tide of new infections.


              FIGHTING        SARS TOGETHER
                    During a press conference, Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong pointed out the
                case of a 72-year-old man who worked at the market and was admitted to Tan
                Tock Seng Hospital on 19 April. Eight of the man’s relatives went to see a general
                practitioner when they came down with fever. The doctor suspected that they
                could be SARS cases so he called for an ambulance designated for suspected
                SARS cases, asked the family to wait for the ambulance, and gave them masks to
                wear. Instead, they wandered off without their masks to a nearby food centre
                and a Chinese medical hall.
                                                           The Prime Minister also told the story of
                                                        the 45-year-old colleague of the index patient,
                                                        who visited a general practitioner, a polyclinic,
                                                        and two sinsehs (practitioners of traditional
                                                        medicine) before going to Changi General
                                                        Hospital, which transferred him to Tan Tock
                                                        Seng Hospital.
                                                           Irresponsible actions like these, Mr Goh
      On 19 April, Singapore’s Prime Minister Goh Chok
                                                        said, put the health and safety of many others
      Tong (right) spoke to reporters about SARS with   at risk. They were part of the problem, he
      Minister for Health Lim Hng Kiang. Prime Minister
                                                        added.2
      Goh said that SARS could be the worst crisis that
      Singapore has faced and announced strict new         “If you are unwell, see a doctor
      measures for quarantined carriers.                immediately,” he advised. “If you continue to




       SARS: How a global
164    epidemic was stopped
be unwell, go back to the same doctor. A new doctor would not know how
your illness has progressed and would not give you the best treatment. Along
the way, you may infect many other people, including your family and friends.”
    While Singaporeans grappled with the spread of the virus, the Government
and the public also had to find a way to supply fresh vegetables with the country’s
largest produce market closed.
    On 24 April, the Government responded to reports of panic buying and
hoarding of vegetables with reassurances that there were enough vegetables in
the country. Over a 24-hour period 772 tons of fresh vegetables, or more than
one-and-a-half times the normal level of imports, were brought in from Malaysia.
Yet shoppers at FairPrice, one of Singapore’s largest supermarket chains, were
allowed to buy no more than S$10 (~US$ 7) worth of vegetables per visit.
    Meanwhile, the Government offered daily temperature checks to about
17,000 stall workers at 132 markets throughout Singapore to reassure the public
that it was safe to shop again. Many vendors accepted the procedure, hoping
that it would improve business. “Having my temperature taken is no problem at
all,” said Dallar Beebi, a 40-year-old stall operator at Geylang Serai market.
“We are in contact with different people every day, so it’s good to know we are
well.”3
    When the 10-day period of closure of the
Pasir Panjang market ended, the Government
took the extra step of keeping the market closed
for five more days and dispatching a team of
60 nurses to check on the health of those
quarantined before allowing them back to
work.
    “We thought it would be better for us to
reassure ourselves that these people are indeed
well,” said Health Minister Lim Hng Kiang,
when announcing the measure.4                       A visitor is checked for fever before entering the
                                                    Pasir Panjang market after the 15-day closure.
    Pasir Panjang finally reopened on 5 May,
but vendors complained that SARS prevention measures such as temperature
checks and registrations for contact tracing were keeping away many shoppers.
Even a promotional offer of 1,000 free bags of fruits and vegetables drew only
about 100 people. “They have the impression that Pasir Panjang is still not
SARS-free,” one wholesaler told the media.5
    But the difficult measures had paid off in one important respect. Swift action
by the Government—closing the market, tracing contacts, and placing more
than 1,000 persons in quarantine—limited the spread of infection to only
14 other persons, nine of whom were family members.




                                                                                 SARS: How a global
                                                                                epidemic was stopped     165
             REFERENCES
             1
                 Olesen A. Singapore quarantines 2,400 workers, closes vegetable market after
                 SARS outbreak. The Associated Press, 20 April 2003.
             2
                 Goh CT. Fighting SARS together. Singapore, Media Relations Division, Ministry
                 of Information, Communications and the Arts, 22 April 2003 (http://
                 app.sprinter.gov.sg/data/pr/2003042204.htm).
             3
                 Arshad A. Enough greens, no need for panic buying. The Straits Times, 24
                 April 2003.
             4
                 Goh Chin Lian. Wholesale centre shut for another five days. The Straits Times
                 29 April 2003.
             5
                 Pasir Panjang Wholesale Centre business yet to recover from SARS impact.
                 Channel NewsAsia, 15 July 2003.




      SARS: How a global
166   epidemic was stopped
     18 THE HANOI-
    FRENCH HOSPITAL:
    DR URBANI’S ALERT


   Dr Carlo Urbani had good instincts. As soon as the outbreak in Viet Nam
became apparent, he saw the need for immediate action. He had already felt
there was something odd about the index case. He was the first person in the
world to recognize the significance of the events as they unfolded. His insistence,
based on his astute observations, pushed the Viet Nam authorities to rapidly
control the outbreak.


FIRST   ALERT
    Mr JC had been admitted to the Hanoi-French Hospital on 26 February,
under the care of the night-duty doctor. In the morning, general physicians
Dr Vu Hoang Thu and Dr Olivier Cattin (medical coordinator) took over his
care. Mr JC’s laboratory results and chest X-ray worried them. Dr Thu remembers,
“Mr JC had just arrived from Hong Kong. Through the Internet we had heard
about this fatal pneumonia from Guangdong as well as the avian influenza
reported by Hong Kong. We discussed a possible connection. So, after the ward
round on the morning of 27 February, I called WHO [in Hanoi] to advise them
of the case and to get some advice on Mr JC’s treatment. They put me through to
Dr Urbani.”
    Dr Thu told Dr Urbani the next afternoon (Friday, 28 March) that the
laboratory test for influenza B had turned up positive (a false-positive result).
There were no serious concerns yet about Mr JC. He, in fact, seemed to improve
the next day, but started getting worse again in the evening. By Sunday he was
being intubated and ventilated. On Monday, Drs Thu and Cattin, desperate for
help, called in some professors from the Hanoi medical school. They tried but
failed to reach Dr Urbani, and left a message for him. After receiving the message,
Dr Urbani went to the French-Hanoi Hospital to review Mr JC and see how he
could help. “Carlo came without warning and it was a pleasure to see him,”
recalls Dr Cattin.



                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   167
             TAKING ACTION
                 After his visit, Dr Urbani sent a full clinical report to the WHO Regional
             Office in Manila. On first hearing about Mr JC, he had discussed the case with
             Dr Hitoshi Oshitani, Regional Adviser for Communicable Disease Surveillance
             and Response, including what samples to take and which laboratories to use to
             reach a diagnosis.
                 By 5 March, as the cases among the hospital staff started presenting [see
             Chapter 5], it was clear that Mr JC had indeed brought an infectious disease into
             Viet Nam. As Drs Thu and Cattin and the hospital staff laboured tirelessly to
             battle the virus, Dr Urbani was in the hospital every day, organizing samples for
             laboratory testing, talking to the staff, and strengthening infection-control
             procedures.
                 Over the next few days, the situation became alarming. On Thursday morning
             seven nurses were hospitalized. Dr Urbani spent all morning with the nurses. “He
             was extremely patient and kind with the staff, [collecting] any piece of information
             to make sense of what was going on and how the infection might be transmitted,”
             recalled Dr Cattin. “The next day, with 12 nurses hospitalized and other staff
             getting ill, Carlo helped us a lot. He [isolated] the nurses, initiated contact tracing,
             and above all [helped with his] positive thinking and fantastic rational approach.”
                 At the end of the day, all the sick nurses were isolated in the middle part of the
             general ward, personal protective equipment was finally in strict use, and security
             guards were posted at the only door that was not blocked and nailed shut.
                 Dr Urbani knew he was dealing with a new and dangerous disease. When
             his wife, Giuliana Chiorrini, warned him about the danger he was facing, he
             responded: “If I cannot work in such situations, what am I here for, to answer
             e-mail and push paper?”
                 Although more and more people were being hospitalized, Dr Urbani and
             WHO Representative Pascale Brudon found it difficult at first to convince the
             local health authorities that they had to do something right away. On 8 March,
             Dr Urbani emailed his colleagues, “I had a very disappointing discussion with
             … the Ministry of Health. … All decisions are postponed to next week, as now
             it’s the weekend and he doesn’t see any reason to hurry up. … [He] said what
             we (WHO) are doing is enough and he is very grateful for that support. … To
             my experience, when they say next week it doesn’t necessarily mean Monday
             morning.”
                 Fortunately, in a long meeting on Sunday, 9 March, Dr Urbani and Ms Brudon
             were able to persuade Vice-Minister of Health Nguyen Van Thuong that more
             urgent action was needed [see Chapter 5]. Critical at this stage were Dr Urbani’s
             temperament and sharp intuition and the trust he had built with the authorities.1
             So was the relationship that Ms Brudon had nurtured between WHO and
             Viet Nam, as well as the leadership and decisiveness shown by Professor Thuong.



      SARS: How a global
168   epidemic was stopped
    As a result, SARS infections in Viet Nam were largely limited to the first wave
of infection. Infections took place mostly at the Hanoi-French Hospital, with a
small cluster of six cases in Ninh Binh Province.


CONTRIBUTING           TO THE GLOBAL RESPONSE
   Dr Urbani’s early alert was crucial in leading WHO to issue its global alert
on 12 March. In an email message to WHO Headquarters on Sunday, 9 March,
he provided a detailed clinical description for the global alert.
   “High fever, severe myalgia, and mild respiratory symptoms characterize
the onset,” he wrote. “In some cases, headache, [neck] pain, without meningeal
signs. Chills and malaise are also common. Cough increases the following days,
and pneumonia is usually diagnosed … 2–4 days from the onset. The lab [tests
show] in some of [the cases] leuco-thrombocytopenia. Then, when pneumonia
develops it has usually the X-ray finding of interstitial infiltrate, sometime diffuse
and bilateral. The dissociation between auscultation and X-ray [is] similar to
common viral/atypical pneumonia. In some cases there is, probably, an alveolar
component, with the corresponding auscultatory finding of moist crepitations.”


TENSIONS SUBSIDE
    By 9 March 2003, Dr Urbani was feeling he could afford to relax
somewhat. Not only had he persuaded the Viet Nam authorities to treat the
outbreak as something out of the ordinary, but WHO had also received
invitations for Dr Oshitani and Dr Tim Uyeki, an influenza expert from the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, United States of America, to
come to Viet Nam. In an email message on 9 March Dr Urbani wrote, “[The
Ministry of Health] has agreed this WHO office can receive technical support
on the subject of outbreak management. … It is my impression now that the
Ministry of Health is taking the necessary steps.” And on 10 March, he wrote,
“I [feel] more relaxed today. Things are moving, our recommendations are
taken in full consideration, and our ‘pressing’ action with the Ministry of
Health has been effective.”
    So on 11 March Dr Urbani was able to fly to Bangkok to attend a
conference. But he had developed a fever. He was isolated and admitted to
hospital on arrival. It was his last journey.


THE    WORLD LOSES A HERO
   On 29 March 2003, the public-health expert credited with helping contain
SARS died of the ailment. He would be remembered not only as a doctor but
also as an avid hang glider, motorcycle rider, and musician, who often took
sheet music on his field trips in the hope that he might get a chance to play the



                                                                          SARS: How a global
                                                                         epidemic was stopped   169
                                                        organ in some local church. He left behind
                                                        his wife, two sons (Tommaso and Luca), and
                                                        a daughter (Maddalena).
                                                            The loss was incalculable. To help
                                                        himself deal with it, 16-year-old Tommaso
                                                        leaned on advice from his father. In an email
                                                        message read to his classmates at the French
                                                        School in Hanoi on 7 April, Tommaso
                                                        wrote: “He taught me never to be too fixed
      Friends pay tribute to Dr Carlo Urbani at a       on some situations in life but to be ready
      memorial service in Hanoi on 8 April. “He will be
      remembered as a hero—in the best and truest       always to start anew.”2
      sense of the word,” declared Kofi Annan, United       Dr Urbani’s important work was
      Nations Secretary-General.
                                                        recognized far and wide. In Hanoi, his death
             was a blow to many. “Viet Nam has paid a very high price, and WHO also paid
             a high price in Viet Nam,” said Ms Brudon. United Nations Secretary-General
             Kofi Annan said in a statement delivered at an 8 April Memorial Service in
             Hanoi, “Had it not been for his recognition that the outbreak of the virus was
             something out of the ordinary, many more would have fallen victim to SARS. It
             was the cruellest of ironies that he lost his own life to SARS while seeking to
             safeguard others from the disease. … He will be remembered as a hero—in the
             best and truest sense of the word.”3
                 On 16 April 2003, the WHO network of laboratories that detected and
             characterized the SARS virus dedicated their work to Urbani.4 On 21 May, in a
             speech to the Fifty-sixth World Health Assembly, WHO Director-General-elect
             Dr Lee Jong-wook spoke about how Dr Urbani had told his wife he was needed
             in the field. “Carlo Urbani has given us WHO at its best,” Dr Lee said, “not
             pushing paper, but pushing back the assault of poverty and disease.”5


             DR URBANI’S         EARLIER WORK
                 Dr Urbani’s pioneering work against SARS
             in its earliest days in Viet Nam was not unusual
             for him. He had spent his life on the front
             lines of the fight against infectious disease
             around the world.
                 Carlo Urbani was born on 19 October
             1956 in Castelplanio, Italy, to a middle-class
             Catholic family. Both his parents were
             educators. His mother was headmistress of the
                                                                  Living life to the fullest: Dr Urbani navigates his
             local primary school and his father taught at        way to the Khmer ruins of Vat Phu in the southern
             the Ancona Commercial Navy Institute. His            part of the Lao People’s Democatic Republic in 2002.
             mother also served a term as town mayor.



      SARS: How a global
170   epidemic was stopped
    Dr Urbani finished medicine at the University of Ancona in 1981 and took
a higher degree in infectious diseases three years later. In 1990, he joined the
staff of the general hospital in Macerata, Italy. Always interested in international
health issues, Dr Urbani approached the World Health Organization and was
given assignments in Maldives, Mauritania, and Guinea in the early 1990s.




 Photos taken by Dr Carlo Urbani in Viet Nam

   In Mauritania, Dr Urbani was the first to document the transmission of
Schistosoma mansoni, an infection affecting over 200 million people worldwide.
In 1997, Dr Urbani joined Médecins Sans Frontières (Doctors Without Borders)
and did landmark work on the prevention and treatment of a parasitic flatworm
often affecting children along the Mekong River. In 1999, he was invited to
receive the Nobel Peace Prize on behalf of the organization. He saw the award
as recognition “that health and dignity are indissociable in human beings, and
that it is a duty to stay close to victims and guarantee their rights”.
   Dr Urbani began working full time for the World Health Organization in
1998 and was posted to the Viet Nam office in May 2000.


A   KIND AND SELFLESS MAN
    Several months after the SARS outbreak was contained, Dr Shigeru Omi,
Regional Director for WHO’s Western Pacific Region, visited Italy to pay respects
to Dr Urbani’s family. Dr Omi recalled, “I had an opportunity to visit his
hometown. I met his wife, his children, and his mother. I now understood why
this kind man was so selfless. The life there is simple, and the community is very
close-knit. Everyone respects each other. And everyone seemed genuinely solid
and warm-hearted. It’s not a coincidence that Dr Urbani, who was born and
raised in this close-knit community, made such a great contribution to the battle
against disease.”




                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                       epidemic was stopped   171
             REFERENCES
             1
                 Reilley B et al. SARS and Carlo Urbani. New England Journal of Medicine,
                 2003, 348:1951–1952.
             2
                 French School in Hanoi reopens as two pupils mourn death of heroic father.
                 Agence France-Presse, 8 April 2003.
             3
                 Dr Carlo Urbani: A hero—in the best and truest sense of the word. New York,
                 NY, United Nations, 8 April 2003 (http://www.un.org/News/Press/docs/2003/
                 sgsm8661.doc.htm, accessed 1 April 2005).
             4
                 Coronavirus never before seen in humans is the cause of SARS. Geneva, World
                 Health Organization, 16 April 2003 (http://www.who.int/mediacentre/releases/
                 2003/pr31/en/, accessed 1 April 2005).
             5
                 Lee J-W. Speech to the Fifty-sixth World Health Assembly. Geneva, World
                 Health Organization, 21 May 2003 (http://www.who.int/dg/lee/speeches/2003/
                 21_05/en/print.html, accessed 1 April 2005).




      SARS: How a global
172   epidemic was stopped
  PART IV: THE
SCIENCE OF SARS




               SARS: How a global
              epidemic was stopped   173
      SARS: How a global
174   epidemic was stopped
                19 CLINICAL
                  FEATURES


    Before accurate and rapid diagnostic tests were available, clinical features
and radiological findings were the only clues for the diagnosis of SARS. As
diagnostic tests are not reliable early in the course of the illness, diagnosis based
on clinical findings remains important, so that early public-health control actions
can be initiated.
    Most of the initial descriptions of SARS came from large cohort studies in
Hong Kong (China), Toronto, Singapore, and China. 1,2,3,4,5 These initial
descriptions had two limitations. First, not all the cases were confirmed by
serology to have SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) infection. Some cases of atypical
pneumonia with other causes may have been included. Second, many patients
received treatments (such as corticosteroid and immunoglobulin) that might
modulate the body’s response to the infection, and hence the course of the
illness.
    Like other illnesses, SARS varies in severity. Some of those infected had no
symptoms or only very mild influenza-like symptoms that were diagnosed as
SARS only by laboratory tests. At the other extreme was the sudden and severe
respiratory infections leading to respiratory failure and death. After recovery,
some patients were left with pulmonary damage. Variations in SARS-CoV are
unlikely to be responsible for the variable manifestations. Host factors such as
the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) may explain some of the variability.6
Age is an important factor, with children generally having milder disease and
older people a higher mortality.
    The clinical descriptions in this chapter are based on a cohort of 102
serologically confirmed SARS cases from Hong Kong who did not receive
corticosteroids, and are supplemented by published reports.


PHASES     OF SARS
   The typical clinical course of SARS generally follows three phases [Figure
19.1].7 Phase 1, which is the viral replication phase, usually lasts for about a
week after symptom onset. The viral load is noted to increase progressively in
respiratory secretions, stool, and urine.8 Chest X-rays and computed tomography



                                                                         SARS: How a global
                                                                        epidemic was stopped   175
             (CT) scans show only slowly progressing lung damage at this stage.8 In about a
             quarter of cases, a transient period of clinical improvement marks the end of
             phase 1. Phase 2 is the immune hyper-reactive phase, with damage caused by
             the body’s immune system. There is recurrence of fever, oxygen desaturation,
             and radiological progression of pneumonia or development of adult respiratory
             distress syndrome (ARDS). This phase is associated with a fall in viral load.
             Phase 3 is the pulmonary destruction phase. There is usually no fever (unless
             there are secondary infections) or only a low-grade one. The pulmonary damage,
             however, persists or even progresses, giving the lungs a honeycomb-like
             appearance on CT scan. As the pulmonary disease progresses, oxygenation of
             blood cannot be sustained and the patient may require breathing support.
             Permanent injury and fibrosis of the lung will set in and the patient may succumb
             as a result of respiratory failure or may recover with residual impairment of
             pulmonary functions. Not all patients go through all three phases, especially
             people who are older or have impaired immune systems.

                             Figure 19.1 Natural course of SARS in a typical
                                       three-phase manifestation




      SARS: How a global
176   epidemic was stopped
PRODROMAL         SYMPTOMS
   The initial symptoms are fever, chills and rigor, muscle pain, dry cough,
headache, and dizziness.6,7,8,9,10 Fever, chills, and malaise are the three most
common symptoms at the time of presentation. These symptoms are non-specific,
making early diagnosis extremely difficult, unless there is a known exposure to
a known SARS case. Productive cough and sore throat are so uncommon in
SARS that they have been suggested as negative diagnostic features.


PULMONARY MANIFESTATIONS
    Pulmonary illness is the primary manifestation of SARS. Dry cough is common
in the early phase of the disease. If the disease gets worse, patients usually find
themselves short of breath while coughing. Inspiratory crackles at the lung bases
are often heard but wheezing is usually absent. Towards the end of the first
week or at the start of the second week, the pulmonary disease begins to worsen.
Shortness of breath increases and limits physical activity. Airspace consolidation,
from being unilateral and focal in the early phase of the disease, soon becomes
multifocal and more extensive in the second week of the illness [Figure 19.2].


    Figure 19.2 Unilateral consolidation that develops into bilateral
                       changes within two days




                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   177
                 Although all lung segments can be involved, it is mostly the lower lobes that
             are affected.13 In a few cases, pulmonary infiltrates could be detected shifting
             from one area to another within one or two days. The shifting radiographic
             shadows coincide with reduction in viral load,8 suggesting an immune-related
             damage instead of direct cytolysis by the virus. A high-resolution CT scan of the
             thorax shows features consistent with, but not specific for, bronchiolitis obliterans
             organizing pneumonia (BOOP),9 an immune-mediated disease that responds to
             corticosteroid therapy [see Figure 19.3]. Other findings include thickening of
             interlobular septa and intralobular interstitium.


              Figure 19.3 Computer tomography showing a mixed ground glass and
                  consolidation opacification resembling bronchiolitis obliterans
                                 organizing pneumonia (BOOP)




                 Around 20% to 25% of patients eventually run into severe respiratory failure
             and ARDS, and thus need care in the intensive care unit (ICU).10 They will
             require mechanical ventilation when their oxygen saturation cannot be
             maintained with high-flow supplementary oxygen. During the epidemic, around
             25% of SARS patients who were admitted to the ICU died, mostly from multiple
             organ failure and secondary nosocomial infections. The mortality rate was higher
             among those who required mechanical ventilation.
                 Pneumothorax and pneumomediastinum (air in the chest) were often reported
             in those severely ill with SARS. These can develop either spontaneously or in
             association with the use of mechanical ventilation. In one report, 12% of seriously



      SARS: How a global
178   epidemic was stopped
ill SARS patients developed spontaneous pneumomediastinum.13 Among patients
nursed in the ICU, 25% developed one or the other condition.14 The incidence
of barotraumas (damage from pressure of ventilation) was unusually high despite
low-volume, low-pressure mechanical ventilation. The reason is unclear, but
reduced lung compliance could be partly responsible, given the pulmonary
oedema with hyaline membrane formation and cellular fibromyxoid-organizing
exudates in airspaces seen by microscope.


INTESTINAL MANIFESTATIONS
    Diarrhoea is the second most common manifestation of SARS. Up to 20% of
patients had diarrhoea on presentation,6 and up to 70% of patients had diarrhoea
during the course of illness.8 The stool is usually watery and high-volume, with
no mucus or blood. The profound water and electrolyte loss can lead to volume
depletion and electrolyte disturbance in severe cases. In some patients, diarrhoea
and fever are the only initial manifestation of SARS in the absence of pneumonia
on X-ray. In others, diarrhoea starts in the second week of the illness as fever
recurs and pulmonary disease progresses. In a Hong Kong cohort of 1,755
patients, diarrhoea was found to be most common in the second week of the
illness, when the fever started to decline. Diarrhoea is associated with more
severe pulmonary diseases.16 Fortunately, it is usually self-limiting and no deaths
due to diarrhoea were reported in SARS cases.
    Intestinal biopsies obtained by colonoscopy or during autopsy showed
minimal inflammation or architectural disruption.11 However, ultrastructural
studies showed the presence of viral particles (60–90nm in size) within both
small and large intestinal cells. Viral particles are confined to the epithelial
cells, primarily in the apical surface enterocytes and rarely in the glandular
epithelial cells. Intracellularly, viral particles are contained within dilated
cytoplasmic vesicles consistent with dilated endoplasmic reticulum.16 During
the second week of the illness, the virus can be found by polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) in the stool of almost all patients.8 In vitro studies show that
SARS-CoV persists in human colonic cells without causing cell damage.12


HEPATIC MANIFESTATIONS
    Liver enzyme derangement is common, usually in the second week of the
illness. In a cohort of 294 patients, around one quarter had elevated alanine
transaminase (ALT) levels on admission.13 In the rest, two thirds developed
elevated ALT after admission. In the few cases where liver biopsy was done,
features of acute hepatitis could be seen but no viral particle was identified.
Electron microscopy did not reveal viral particles, but PCR suggests that viral
protein could be found in some cases.14 It is likely that in most of these cases,
liver dysfunction resulted from acute inflammatory response and cytokine


                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   179
             reaction. There is little evidence to show that SARS-CoV directly invaded the
             liver tissue. Although initial data suggested that co-infection of hepatitis B virus
             and SARS-CoV led to worse clinical outcome,8 with larger cohort analysis, this
             co-infection did not appear to jeopardize the survival of the patients.18


             HAEMATOLOGICAL MANIFESTATIONS
                  The haematological features of SARS help to diagnose the disease. Initial
             and progressive lymphopaenia (absolute lymphocyte count <1000/mm 3) is
             common.15 The lymphocyte count continues to drop as the disease progresses
             and in most cases reaches its lowest point in the second week. Lymphopaenia is
             so common, in fact, that without a progressive drop in lymphocyte count, a
             diagnosis of SARS would be open to doubt. All T-cell lineages appear to be
             affected, with the number of CD4 and CD8 cells dropping in parallel; on the
             other hand, B lymphocytes are relatively unaffected.20
                  The cytokine profile of SARS patients shows a marked elevation of Th1
             response (Interferon-gamma, IL-1, IL-6, and IL-12) for at least two weeks after
             the onset of the disease but little elevation of TNF-alpha and anti-inflammatory
             cytokinese (IL-10).16 The chemokine profile demonstrates a significant elevation
             of neutrophil chemokine IL-8, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1).21
                  In most cases, the lymphocyte count starts to recover in the third week of
             illness, coinciding with clinical improvement. However, 30% of patients are
             still lymphopaenic in the fifth week of SARS.20 Lower counts of CD4 and CD8
             cells are associated with adverse clinical outcomes of ICU admission or death.20
             Moreover, thrombocytopaenia, reactive thrombocytosis, and isolated prolonged
             activated thromboplastin time are commonly observed. 20 Disseminated
             intravascular coagulopathy, however, rarely occurs.


             RENAL MANIFESTATIONS
                 Although the virus has been identified in the renal tubules, there is little
             evidence to suggest that SARS-CoV causes direct injury to the kidney. However,
             patients with end-stage renal failure and on renal replacement therapy such as
             hemodialysis may have a more aggressive and yet different presentation of the
             illness.17 In a small series of four dialysis patients who contracted SARS-CoV, all
             four developed respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation and
             eventually died.18


             CARDIAC MANIFESTATIONS
                About half of patients experienced hypotension (systolic blood pressure
             <100mmHg ± diastolic blood pressure <50mmHg) during hospitalization.19 The
             low blood pressure may account for the dizziness felt by many patients. Persistent



      SARS: How a global
180   epidemic was stopped
tachycardia (increased heart rate) was reported in 40% of patients, even in the
absence of fever.24 These abnormal cardiac rhythms were transient and did not
warrant therapy. Patients were mostly asymptomatic. Prospective studies using
transthoracic echocardiography, in a cohort of 46 patients confirmed to have
SARS,24 disclosed a significantly higher left ventricular index of myocardial
performance (IMP) in the acute phase of the infection. Those who required
mechanical ventilation had a lower mean left ventricular ejection fraction and
a higher mean IMP. These parameters point to a subclinical diastolic impairment
without systolic involvement of the heart in SARS. Microscope examination of
the heart, however, reveals no interstitial lymphocytic infiltrate or myocyte
necrosis.24 Whether myocardial performance is impaired by cytokine-induced
injury, hypoxic damage or drug- (ribavirin) induced alteration is not yet known.


NEUROLOGICAL MANIFESTATIONS
   Neurological symptoms of SARS appear to be rare, with only isolated reports
of epileptic fits, mental confusion, and disorientation.20 No focal neurological
deficit or structural abnormality on CT and magnetic resonance (MR) scans was
found. Lumbar puncture and analysis of spinal fluid were normal in most cases.
SARS-CoV RNA were detected in the cerebrospinal fluid of a patient with seizure,
but the role of the virus in causing the seizure is not known.25 A number of
patients with SARS developed affective psychosis during the acute phase of
their illness. A case-control study found the psychosis to be associated with
high-dose steroid use, personal vulnerability, and psychosocial stress.21


THROMBISIS       AND PULMONARY EMBOLISM
   Despite a low platelet count in most cases, venous thrombosis was reported
quite often in some series. In Singapore, around one third of the cases had deep
venous thrombosis of the legs. 10 Thrombo-embolism was also found in a
substantial proportion of postmortem cases.


ATYPICAL PRESENTATION
   Individuals may not develop typical features of SARS. Older people often
present with clinical or atypical symptoms and may have no documented fever
even with progressive pneumonia.22 They tend to present with common geriatric
syndromes such as falls, confusion, incontinence, and poor feeding. The
presenting symptoms may be gastrointestinal (such as diarrhoea, nausea, or
vomiting) rather than respiratory. In the frail and elderly, diarrhoea may be
thought to be due to faecal incontinence and poor feeding rather than infection.
   Diagnosis of SARS can be more difficult in the presence of other diseases
and in patients with impaired immune systems (e.g. those with chronic renal



                                                                     SARS: How a global
                                                                    epidemic was stopped   181
             failure or on immunosuppressive therapy including corticosteroid), who may
             present with respiratory illness and pneumonia without fever.23 Plain chest X-rays
             are difficult to interpret in patients with pre-existing chronic pulmonary diseases
             (e.g. pulmonary fibrosis) and in the presence of pulmonary oedema (e.g.
             congestive heart failure) and the radiological features of SARS may mimic some
             of these conditions.
                 SARS patients can present in a variety of ways including with acute pulmonary
             oedema, exacerbation of chronic obstructive airway disease, influenza,
             bacteraemia, acute abdomen, and even hip fracture. The judicious use of high-
             resolution CT scan of thorax (HRCT) may be useful in the early diagnosis of
             SARS in atypical presentations.


             RESPIRATORY       FAILURE, MORTALITY AND PROGNOSTIC FACTORS
                 The crude global mortality was 10%, with several factors associated with
             higher mortality. These include advanced age, male gender, other illnesses
             (especially cerebrovascular disease, ischaemic heart disease, diabetes mellitus,
             chronic renal failure, and chronic liver failure), certain laboratory parameters
             on admission (high neutrophil counts, C-reactive protein levels, low albumin
             levels, and high levels of urea and creatinine, CPK and LDH, and glucose), and
             evidence of respiratory failure on admission (low level of oxygen saturation in
             the blood).6,7 The major determinant of mortality thus appears to be respiratory
             failure and multiple organ failure.6, 24
                 Analysis using a multiple logistic regression model (composite model) shows
             that advanced age, male sex, high neutrophil count, and high LDH and CPK
             levels are the important predictors of pulmonary failure that requires mechanical
             ventilation, and of mortality.29 These parameters are consistently found to carry
             important prognostic implications both at presentation and on the seventh day
             after the onset of symptoms.


             SUMMARY
                 SARS can be a dreadful disease that progresses rapidly and leads to high
             mortality. Most people who contract the virus develop flu-like symptoms
             followed by lower respiratory tract infection and gastrointestinal complications.
             Roughly 25% of patients with SARS will develop respiratory failure and 10%
             succumb despite intensive therapy. Atypical cases with unusual presentations
             impose further difficulties in early diagnosis.
                 Diagnosing SARS requires a high index of suspicion, alertness to any contact
             history of known SARS case, and an updated knowledge of the current
             prevalence of SARS in the locality.




      SARS: How a global
182   epidemic was stopped
REFERENCES
1
   Lee N et al. A major outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome in Hong
   Kong. New England Journal of Medicine, 2003, 348:1986–1994.
2
   Booth CM et al. Clinical features and short-term outcomes of 144 patients
   with SARS in the greater Toronto area. Journal of the American Medical
   Association, 2003, 289:2801–2809.
3
   Peiris JS et al. Clinical progression and viral load in a community outbreak of
   coronavirus-associated SARS pneumonia: a prospective study. Lancet, 2003,
   361:1767–1772.
4
   Wu W et al. A hospital outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome in
   GuangZhou, China. Chinese Medicine Journal (English), 2003, 116:811–818.
5
   Hsu LY et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in Singapore: clinical
   features of index patient and initial contacts. Emerging Infectious Diseases,
   2003, 9:713–717.
6
   Ng MH et al. Association of human-leukocyte-antigen class I (B*0703) and
   class II (DRB1*0301) genotypes with susceptibility and resistance to the
   development of severe acute respiratory syndrome. Journal of Infectious
   Diseases, 2004, 190:515–518.
7
   Sung JJ et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS): report of treatment
   and outcome after a major outbreak. Thorax, 2004, 59:414–420.
8
   Antonio GE et al. Imaging of severe acute respiratory syndrome in Hong Kong.
   American Journal of Roentgenology, 2003, 181:11–17.
9
   Wong KT et al. Thin-section CT of severe acute respiratory syndrome:
   evaluation of patients exposed to or with the disease. Radiology, 2003,
   228:395–400.
10
   Gomersall CD et al. Short-term outcome of critically ill patients with severe
   acute respiratory syndrome. Intensive Care Medicine, 2004, 30:381–387.
11
   Leung WK et al. Enteric involvement of severe acute respiratory syndrome–
   associated coronavirus infection. Gastroenterology, 2003, 125:1011–1017.
12
   Chan PK et al. Persistent infection of SARS coronavirus in colonic cells in
   vitro. Journal of Medical Virology, 2004, 74:1–7.
13
   Chan HL et al. Retrospective analysis of liver function derangement in severe
   acute respiratory syndrome. American Journal of Medicine, 2004, 116:566–
   567.
14
   Chau TN, Lee KC, Yao H. SARS-associated viral hepatitis caused by a novel
   coronavirus: report of three cases. Hepatology, 2004, 39:291–294.
15
   Wong R et al. Haematological manifestations in patients with severe acute
   respiratory syndrome: retrospective analysis. British Medical Journal, 2003,
   326:1358–1362.




                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   183
             16
                Wong CK et al. Plasma inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in severe
                acute respiratory syndrome. Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 2004,
                136:95–103.
             17
                Kwan BC et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome in a hemodialysis patient.
                American Journal of Kidney Diseases, 2003, 42:1069–1074.
             18
                Wong PN et al. Clinical presentation and outcome of severe acute respiratory
                syndrome in dialysis patients. American Journal of Kidney Diseases, 2003,
                42:1075–1081.
             19
                 Li SS et al. Left ventricular performance in patients with severe acute respirtaory
                syndrome: a 30-day echocardiographic follow-up study. Circulation, 2003,
                108:1798–1803.
             20
                Hung EC et al. Detection of SARS coronavirus RNA in the cerebrospinal fluid
                of a patient with severe acute respiratory syndrome. Clinical Chemistry, 2003,
                49:2108–2109.
             21
                Lee DT et al. Factors associated with psychosis among patients with severe
                acute respiratory syndrome: a case-control study. Clinical Infectious Diseases,
                2004, 39:1247–1249.
             22
                Cheng HM, Kwok T. Mild SARS in elderly patients. Canadian Medical
                Association Journal, 2004, 170:927.
             23
                Wong AT et al. Coronavirus in an AIDS patient. AIDS, 2004, 18:829–830.
             24
                Choi KW et al. Outcomes and prognostic factors in 267 patients with severe
                acute respiratory syndrome in Hong Kong. Annals of Internal Medicine, 2003,
                139:715–723.




      SARS: How a global
184   epidemic was stopped
     20 EPIDEMIOLOGY


GLOBAL SURVEILLANCE             OF   SARS
    The global surveillance of SARS started with the first WHO alert of 12 March
2003. By 15 March, WHO had received reports of more than 150 new suspected
cases of SARS. In the first month, 2,781 SARS cases and 111 deaths had been
reported to WHO from 17 countries on three continents.1 By 5 July 2003, when
WHO declared the outbreak over, it had received reports of 8,439 cases and
812 deaths from 32 countries and areas.
    Cases continued to be reclassified (according to the results of late-convalescent
serology) after the outbreak. The global data set was closed on 31 December
2003, with the total revised to 8,096 cases (21% among health-care workers)
and 774 deaths from 29 countries and areas [Table 20.1].2 Over 95% (n=7,768)
of the cases were reported by 12 countries and areas of the Western Pacific
Region. Mainland China had the largest outbreak (5,327 cases), and Beijing the
largest single site outbreak (2,521 cases). Beijing had a peak of over 100 probable
and suspected SARS cases hospitalized daily, for several days [see Chapter 5].3
The largest outbreak outside Asia occurred in the Greater Toronto Area, Canada
(247 cases during a biphasic outbreak).
    The global epidemic curve of the outbreak by date of onset shows several
peaks in the daily number of reported cases [Figure 20.1]. The peaks reflect the
initial outbreak in Guangdong, China, the exponential rise in cases in March
2003 as SARS spread to several countries, the Amoy Gardens outbreak in late
March [see Chapter 16], transmission in hospital in Beijing and Taipei beginning
in April [see Chapters 5 and 9], and the second wave of the outbreak in Toronto
in May [see Chapter 12].




                                                                         SARS: How a global
                                                                        epidemic was stopped   185
             Table 20.1 Probable SARS cases reported to WHO (from 1 November 2002 to 31 July 2003; based
                         on data reported up to 31 December 2003)
                                 Cumulative number of cases
               Areas             Female Male Total Median              Number     Case     Number      Number     Date of     Date of
                                                    age                of         fatality of cases    of HCWs    onset:      onset:
                                                    (range)            deaths a   ratio    imported    affected   first       last
                                                                                  (%)       (%)        (%)        probable    probable
                                                                                                                  case        case

               Australia              4      2      6     15 (1–45)        0       0        6 (100)      0 (0)    26 Feb 03    1 Apr 03
               Canada                151   100    251     49 (1–98)       43      17        5 (2)      109 (43) 23 Feb 03     12 Jun 03
               China               2674 2607     5327 b        ND        349       7            NA    1002 (19) 16 Nov 02      3 Jun 03
               Hong Kong (China) 977       778   1755     40 (0–100)     299      17            NA     386 (22) 15 Feb 03     31 May 03
               Macao (China)          0      1      1     28               0       0        1 (100)      0 (0)    5 May 03     5 May 03
               Taiwan, China         218   128    346 c   42 (0–93)       37      11       21 (6)       68 (20) 25 Feb 03     15 Jun 03
               France                 1      6      7     49 (26–61)       1      14        7 (100)      2 (29) d 21 Mar 03    3 May 03
               Germany                4     5       9      4 4 (4–73)      0       0        9 (100)      1 (11)    9 Mar 03    6 May 03
               India                  0      3      3     25 (25–30)       0       0        3 (100)      0 (0)    25 Apr 03    6 May 03
               Indonesia              0      2      2     56 (47–65)       0       0        2 (100)      0 (0)     6 Apr 03   17 Apr 03
               Italy                  1      3      4     30.5 (25–54)     0       0        4 (100)      0 (0)    12 Mar 03   20 Apr 03
               Kuwait                 1      0      1     50               0       0        1 (100)      0 (0)     9 Apr 03    9 Apr 03
               Malaysia               1      4      5     30 (26–84)       2      40        5 (100)      0 (0)    14 Mar 03   22 Apr 03
               Mongolia               8      1      9     32 (17–63)       0       0        8 (89)       0 (0)    31 Mar 03    6 May 03
               New Zealand            1      0      1     67               0        0       1 (100)      0 (0)    20 Apr 03   20 Apr 03
               Philippines            8      6     14     41 (29–73)       2      14        7 (50)       4 (29) 25 Feb 03      5 May 03
               Republic of Ireland    0      1      1     56               0        0       1 (100)      0 (0)    27 Feb 03   27 Feb 03
               Republic of Korea      0      3      3     40 (20–80)       0       0        3 (100)      0 (0)    25 Apr 03   10 May 03
               Romania                0      1      1     52               0       0        1 (100)      0 (0)    19 Mar 03   19 Mar 03
               Russian Federation     0      1      1     25               0       0            ND       0 (0)    5 May 03     5 May 03
               Singapore             161    77    238     35 (1–90)       33      14        8 (3)       97 (41) 25 Feb 03      5 May 03
               South Africa           0      1      1     62               1      100       1 (100)      0 (0)     3 Apr 03    3 Apr 03
               Spain                  0      1      1     33               0       0        1 (100)      0 (0)    26 Mar 03   26 Mar 03
               Sweden                 3      2      5     43 (33–55)       0       0        5 (100)      0 (0)    28 Mar 03   23 Apr 03
               Switzerland            0      1      1     35               0       0        1 (100)      0 (0)     9 Mar 03    9 Mar 03
               Thailand               5      4      9     42 (2–79)        2      22        9 (100)      1 (11) d 11 Mar 03   27 May 03
               United Kingdom         2      2      4     59 (28–74)       0       0        4 (100)      0 (0)     1 Mar 03    1 Apr 03
               United States         13     14     27     36 (0–83)        0       0       27 (100)      0 (0)    24 Feb 03   13 Jul 03e
               Viet Nam              39     24     63     43 (20–76)       5       8        1 (2)       36 (57) 23 Feb 03     14 Apr 03
               Total                             8096          774         9.6    142    1706

         HCW, health-care worker; NA, not applicable; ND, not determined
         a
            Includes only cases whose death is attributed to SARS.
         b
            Case classification by sex is unknown for 46 cases.
         C
            Since 11 July 2003, 325 cases have been discarded in Taiwan, China. Laboratory information was insufficient
         or incomplete for 135 discarded cases, of which 101 died.
         d
            Includes HCWs who acquired illness in other areas.
         e
            Due to differences in case definitions, the United States has reported probable cases of SARS with onsets of
         illness after 5 July 2003.




      SARS: How a global
186   epidemic was stopped
  Figure 20.1 Global epidemic curve: probable SARS cases by date of
                                onset*




THE NEED FOR GLOBAL COLLABORATION IN THE
EPIDEMIOLOGY OF SARS
    WHO established the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Epidemiology of SARS
to help reach consensus on the key epidemiological parameters needed for
public health control: the incubation period, period of communicability, and
modes of transmission of the virus; and identification of risk groups and factors.
The group also facilitated information sharing and pooled international data to
increase the power of any analysis and ensure that findings were representative.
    The Working Group held a weekly teleconference from 28 March 2003.
Membership initially included epidemiologists from outbreak sites and from
the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) [see Chapter 2].
Clinical and laboratory experts were later invited to participate in the
teleconferences to foster greater collaboration among the disciplines.
    To further develop the evidence base for control measures, WHO held a
global meeting on the epidemiology of SARS on 16-17 May 2003. This meeting
and the ongoing work of the Working Group culminated in the release of the
WHO Consensus Document on the Epidemiology of SARS. 4 The key
epidemiological findings in this document remain valid.




                                                                      SARS: How a global
                                                                     epidemic was stopped   187
             INCUBATION PERIOD
                The incubation period is the amount of time it takes for symptoms of a disease
             to appear after an individual is infected. For SARS, the incubation period is
             generally reported as two to 10 days,4,5,6,7 (the mean being five days following
             exposure), although both shorter and longer incubation periods have been
             reported.8,9,10,11,12 It appears likely, but not proven, that the transmission route
             does not influence the incubation period. Other factors that could affect the
             incubation period also have not been shown (such as the intensity of exposure
             and viral load).


             PERIOD OF COMMUNICABILITY
                 The period of communicability of SARS is not as well defined. Evidence
             from carefully constructed transmission trees supports earlier observations that
             transmission only occurs when cases are symptomatic. This is consistent with
             the finding that the amount of virus shed from the respiratory secretions, urine,
             and faeces of infected patients in the first few days of illness is usually low or
             undetectable.13 There have been no reports of the transmission of SARS before
             the onset of symptoms or in asymptomatic cases. The risk of secondary
             transmission is low when cases are identified and isolated within three days of
             symptom onset.4
                 Transmission appears to be most likely from severely ill patients or those
             experiencing rapid clinical deterioration, usually during the second week of
             illness, and correlates with peak viral excretion from the respiratory tract.14
             Convalescent patients have limited infectivity and have not been implicated in
             transmission.13 There are no reports of transmission beyond 10 days of fever
             resolution, consistent with the total period of isolation recommended by WHO.15
                 Viral shedding in respiratory secretions beyond the sixth week after the onset
             of illness is rare,16 although prolonged shedding of SARS-CoV RNA in stool
             samples of recovering patients has been reported by several authors.16,17,18 One
             respiratory sample in a severely ill patient collected on day 50 was positive by
             reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).19 The longest period
             of continuing detection of viral RNA from stool samples of a recovering patient
             is 73 days.18 However, no virus was successfully isolated from those patients
             indicating low, if any, infectivity. There is no evidence of disease recrudescence.


             TRANSMISSION         OF SARS
                 Transmission was mostly limited to close contacts—those who had cared
             for, lived with, or had direct contact with the respiratory secretions or body
             fluids of a person with SARS. Large, virus-laden respiratory droplets from
             symptomatic cases of SARS are deposited onto mucous membranes (eyes, nose,
             and mouth) or by contact with infectious fomites. Saliva, tears, urine, and faeces


      SARS: How a global
188   epidemic was stopped
also contain virus but have not been implicated in hospital-acquired infections
when standard infection-control precautions are observed. Transmission from
pregnant mothers to their babies has not been reported.5
   The route(s) of transmission have not been fully determined for some cases
and clusters. Faecal aerosolization from faulty plumbing was implicated in the
Amoy Gardens outbreak [see Chapter 16].20 Aerosolization spread is likely to
have also been responsible for spread in the Metropole Hotel [see Chapter 14]
and in some hospitals, 21,22,23 and may have been responsible for in-flight
transmission [see Chapter 15].
   Environmental contamination with infectious respiratory secretions or other
body fluids may have contributed to transmission. Although diarrhoea is common
in SARS and viral shedding in faeces can be prolonged, true faecal-oral
transmission did not appear to occur, and there are no reports of food or
waterborne transmission.
   Experimental evidence on the stability of SARS-CoV supports a role for contact
transmission in contaminated environments. SARS-CoV was still infective for
up to nine days in suspension and up to six days when dried.24


TRANSMISSION         SETTINGS
    Hospitals were sites of transmission amplification,25 and the main site for
SARS transmission. This was first noted in Guangdong, China, where after mid-
January 2003, SARS cases were concentrated in hospitals and household contacts
of SARS cases.26 In all outbreak sites, a large number of health-care workers
were infected by the primary case presenting at their facility with atypical
pneumonia of unknown aetiology. Later, the management or transfer of
unrecognized cases led to continued transmission after control measures had
been implemented.6,27,28 In Singapore, about 76% of SARS cases were infected in
hospitals, of which 42% were health-care workers.29
    The second wave of SARS transmission in Canada was attributed to the inherent
difficulties in diagnosing SARS when the clinical presentation is atypical, and
prematurely decreasing respiratory precautions in hospitals.30,31
    Most of the Viet Nam cases were infected in the hospital where the index
case was admitted, but transmission did not occur in the other hospital where
infectious SARS cases were admitted, in spite of the inconsistent adherence to
infection control and use of personal protective equipment.32
    In health-care settings, medical procedures leading to aerosolization of
respiratory secretions (such as intubation,33 the use of nebulisers,21,22 suction,22
or assisted ventilation23) resulted on occasion in transmission to health-care
workers despite use of personal protective equipment. A Hong Kong study found
infection of health-care workers was strongly associated with inconsistent use
of personal protection equipment and with inadequate training in and poor
understanding of infection-control procedures.13


                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                       epidemic was stopped   189
                 In Hong Kong (China), non-clinical support staff had the highest attack rate
             of 2.7% (overall rate of 1.2% for all hospital staff), and were 2.3 and 9.8 times
             more likely to contract SARS than nurses and doctors, respectively.34 Non-clinical
             staff also had the highest attack rate in Viet Nam.32
                 Households with at least one probable SARS case were the second most
             important transmission setting. 35 In Hong Kong, the number of secondary
             household transmissions for 1,214 SARS cases was studied for two phases of the
             epidemic.36 Transmission occurred in 15% of all households (22% and 11% for
             earlier and later phases, respectively) and to 8% of all household members
             (12% and 6% for earlier and later phases, respectively). Duration before
             hospitalization, visiting the SARS patient in hospital (and mask use during the
             visit), and frequency of close contact were independent predictors of transmission
             in a multivariate analysis. A Singapore study of 114 households with 417 contacts
             reported an attack rate of 6%,37 similar to the 5% reported in Beijing.38
                 Household contacts may have been infected in hospitals, rather than in their
             homes. An analysis of the onset dates of the contacts of the first Singapore index
             case suggests that all her household and social contacts were infected when
             they visited her in hospital.
                 During the 2002–2003 SARS epidemic, transmission to social and casual
             contacts was occasionally reported as a result of short but intense exposure to a
             severely ill case in an enclosed space (e.g. in a hospital,5,39 market,29 office,40
             airplane,41 private transport,39,29 and train42) or from longer exposure to patients
             who were less severely ill. Community-acquired infection has been associated
             with religious gatherings.43 Overall, the risk of acquiring SARS from air travel,
             even before the second travel advisory, was extremely small.44 The incidence
             density of secondary transmission was calculated as 1 per 100 person-hours of
             travel in one study.45 Transmission in public buildings, schools, or open-air
             settings has not been reported.50,46


             PATIENT CHARACTERISTICS
                  Most SARS transmissions were from sick people who had been hospitalized.
             As a result, 21% of all cases were health-care workers, with a range from 19%
             to 57% in the different outbreak sites [Table 20.2]. It also led to 53% of all cases
             being women, as they are over-represented among health-care workers. These
             data do not include cases in other patients and visitors within health-care settings
             so it underestimates the total risk of SARS in hospitals during the epidemic. In
             Canada, for example, SARS transmission was almost exclusively health-care
             associated with only a few cases acquired within affected households or in the
             broader community.
                  All age groups were affected (age range 0-100 years, median age 42 years).
             It is not fully understood why SARS was uncommon in younger children, but it
             may be partly due to the fact that children were less likely to be exposed to


      SARS: How a global
190   epidemic was stopped
                  Table 20.2 SARS in health-care workers at outbreak
                             sites, November 2002–July 2003
                                       Total cases Health-care worker cases
                  Area                             Number Percentage (%)
                  Canada                     251       109          43
                  China                    5,327      1002          19
                  Hong Kong (China)        1,755       386          22
                  Taiwan, China              346        68          20
                  The Philippines             14         3          21
                  Singapore                  238        97          41
                  Viet Nam                    63        36          57
                  All outbreak sites       7,994        36          57
                Source: Data reported to WHO



SARS as a result of protective behaviours by exposed parents (especially health-
care workers) and a lower likelihood of exposure within health-care settings.
Most children experienced only mild illness.47,48 There is no evidence that young
children were asymptomatically infected. In Beijing, only 1% of cases were
children below 10 years.3 Age-stratified serosurveys in Guangdong Province,
where a higher proportion of cases were acquired in the community, may provide
a better understanding of the risk to children before control measures were fully
implemented. Children did not appear to be implicated in transmission in schools
or to adults. In the only well-documented chain of transmission from a child to
household contacts, an 11-year-old child transmitted SARS to four people (three
adults and one child) in another household.49 Adolescents with SARS may
develop severe disease requiring oxygen therapy or assisted ventilation.50,51 SARS
acquired during pregnancy was associated with a high incidence of spontaneous
miscarriage, preterm delivery, and intrauterine growth retardation.52 Pregnant
women also experienced a higher case fatality rate.53, 54
    The case fatality rate in adults increased with age in all centres and exceeded
50% in cases aged 55 years and over.4 Overall, 20%–25% of cases required
intensive care during their illness.


ASYMPTOMATIC INFECTION AND CONTRIBUTION TO SARS
TRANSMISSION
   Serological surveys of populations at risk of SARS in 2003 found that
asymptomatic infections were very uncommon.55,56,57,58,59 In Hong Kong, only
two of 1,068 contacts of SARS cases (0.19%) who did not develop symptoms
had SARS antibodies.56 A survey of 12,000 Hong Kong residents found only
seven positive results (0.009%).59 In Taiwan, China, a survey of 623 healthy



                                                                               SARS: How a global
                                                                              epidemic was stopped   191
             health-care workers who treated SARS patients found asymptomatic
             seroconversions in only two hospitals where four out of 433 health-care workers
             had SARS antibodies (0.92%).60
                 Most laboratory-confirmed SARS cases met the WHO clinical case definition
             (of severe disease), but mild infections have been reported. Mild cases of infection
             with SARS-CoV may be difficult to detect, and could theoretically have been
             important in transmission. However, there is no evidence that they played an
             important role in transmission during the epidemic. Mild infections have not
             been implicated in super-spreading events.19,57,61,62
                 Despite close examination of contacts prior to symptoms, there was no
             observed transmission from asymptomatic infections. 51,63 If asymptomatic
             transmission does occur, it must be extremely rare.


             REPRODUCTION NUMBER IN DIFFERENT TRANSMISSION
             SETTINGS AND UNDER DIFFERENT CONTROL STRATEGIES
                 The basic reproduction number (R0) is the average number of secondary
             cases infected by an infected person, during their entire infectious period, when
             entering a totally susceptible population and before control measures are
             instituted. For SARS, R0 was estimated at about 3,64 consistent with a condition
             of relatively low infectivity spread by direct contact or larger virus-laden droplets
             that travel only a few metres rather than by aerosols.
                 The serial interval is the average number of days between the onset of
             symptoms in a primary case and the onset of symptoms in secondary cases. For
             SARS, it was relatively long at 8.4 days (SD 3.8 days),65 which assisted in the
             early identification of contacts and rapid application of control measures.
                 Data from Singapore where contact tracing was complete indicate that the
             majority of SARS cases did not transmit the infection to others.65 Of the remaining
             cases, most transmitted infection to only a few others, but five cases transmitted
             infection to about 20 or more. These events with large numbers (variably defined)
             of transmissions were called “super-spreading” events and are discussed in
             Chapter 13.
                 Super-spreading events played a major role in transmission of SARS in all
             sites. 21,66,67,68,69,70,71 They accounted for 71% and 75% of SARS cases in Hong Kong
             and Singapore, respectively.72 A meta-analysis of super-spreading events is still
             needed to better understand the underlying behavioural, biological, and
             environmental factors.


             MODELLING         CONTROL MEASURES
                Modelling the Hong Kong data supports the findings from Singapore that the
             daily rate of infection was correlated with the number of symptomatic cases
             who were not isolated within four days of symptom onset.72


      SARS: How a global
192   epidemic was stopped
    A modelling study found that hospital-based case management with
precautions to prevent transmission had the greatest impact on the reproduction
number.64 Their model showed that for an R0 of 3, case isolation as a single
measure can control a SARS outbreak if isolation reduces transmission four-fold
and the mean time to isolation is within three days of symptom onset. Even
small delays in case isolation substantially reduced the effectiveness of case
isolation. These results are consistent with the finding that reducing the mean
time from symptom onset to isolation from 4.8 days to 3.7 days was insufficient
to control the outbreak in Hong Kong.73 Additional analysis of 1,709 cases in
Hong Kong showed that laboratory-confirmed SARS cases were highly clustered
geographically.74 Using cartographic and geostatistical methods epidemiological
investigations can provide real-time quantitative data for identifying and tracking
the geospatial spread of infectious diseases.


SUMMARY
   The key epidemiological features of SARS, which were defined early on
with limited information, remain valid. The most critical finding was that SARS
transmission did not occur until after symptom onset, allowing early isolation
of cases to terminate the outbreak. The main mode of transmission is through
respiratory droplets that require close contact or transfer through fomites.
However, under special circumstances, aerosolization can occur, leading to
airborne spread.


REFERENCES
1
    Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS): multicountry outbreak – Update
    27. One month into the global SARS outbreak: Status of the outbreak and
    lessons for the immediate future. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2003
    (http://www.who.int/csr/don/2003_04_11/en/).
2
    Summary of probable SARS cases with onset of illness from 1 November 2002
    to 31 July 2003 (based on data as of 31 December 2003). Geneva, World
    Health Organization, 2004 (http://www.who.int/csr/sars/country/
    table2004_04_21/en/).
3
    Liang W et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome, Beijing, 2003. Emerging
    Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10:25–30.
4
    Consensus document on the epidemiology of acute severe respiratory syndrome
    (SARS). Geneva, World Health Organization, 2003 (WHO/CDS/CSR/GAR/
    2003.11).
5
    Varia M et al. (for the Hospital Outbreak Investigation Team). Investigation of
    a nosocomial outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in Toronto,
    Canada. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 2003, 169:285–292.



                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                       epidemic was stopped   193
             6
                Chow KY et al. Outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome in a tertiary
                hospital in Singapore, linked to an primary patient with atypical presentation:
                epidemiological study. British Medical Journal, 2004,328:195.
             7
                Donnelly CA et al. Epidemiological determinants of spread of causal agent of
                severe acute respiratory syndrome in Hong Kong. Lancet, 2003, 361:1761–
                1766.
             8
                Zhao CH et al. Clinical manifestation, treatment, and outcome of severe acute
                respiratory syndrome: analysis of 108 cases in Beijing. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za
                Zhi, 2003, 83:897–901. [Abstract. Article in Chinese]
             9
                Wu W et al. A hospital outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome in
                Guangzhou, China. Chinese Medical Journal (English), 2003, 116:811–818.
             10
                Chan-Yeung M et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome. International Journal
                of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 2003, 7:1117–1130.
             11
                Tsang KW et al. A cluster of cases of severe acute respiratory syndrome in
                Hong Kong. New England Journal of Medicine, 2003, 348:1977–1985.
             12
                Chan W et al. Epidemiologic linkage and public health implications of a
                cluster of severe acute respiratory syndrome in an extended family. Paediatric
                Infectious Disease Journal, 2004, in press.
             13
                Lau JT et al. SARS transmission among hospital workers in Hong Kong. Emerging
                Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10:280–286.
             14
                Peiris JSM et al. Clinical progression and viral load in a community outbreak
                of coronavirus-associated SARS pneumonia: a prospective clinical trial. Lancet,
                2003, 361:1767–1772.
             15
                Management of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). Revised 11 April
                2003. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2003 (http://www.who.int/csr/
                sars/management/en/).
             16
                Chan PKS et al. Laboratory diagnosis of SARS. Emerging Infectious Diseases,
                2004, 10:825–831.
             17
                Liu W et al. Long-term SARS coronavirus excretion from patient cohort, China.
                Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10:1841–1843.
             18
                Leung WK et al. Enteric involvement of severe acute respiratory syndrome-
                associated coronavirus infection. Gastroenterology, 2003, 125:1011–1017.
             19
                Chang W-T et al. SARS exposure and emergency department workers. Emerging
                Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10:1117–1119.
             20
                Yu IT et al. Evidence of airborne transmission of the severe acute respiratory
                syndrome virus. New England Journal of Medicine, 2004, 351:609–611.
             21
                Wong T-W et al. Cluster of SARS among medical students exposed to single
                patient, Hong Kong. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10:269–276.
             22
                Loeb M et al. SARS among critical care nurses, Toronto. Emerging Infectious
                Diseases, 2004, 10:251–255.




      SARS: How a global
194   epidemic was stopped
23
   Lee N et al. A major outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome in Hong
   Kong. New England Journal of Medicine, 2003, 348:1986–1994.
24
   Rebenau HF et al. Stability and inactivation of SARS coronavirus. Medical
   Microbiology and Immunology (Berlin), 2005, 194:1–6.
25
   Drazen JM. Case clusters of the severe acute respiratory syndrome. New England
   Journal of Medicine, 2003, 348:e6–7.
26
   He J-F et al. An epidemiological study on the primary cases of severe acute
   respiratory syndrome which occurred in different cities in Guangdong province
   (English abstract). In Chinese Medical Association Journals. Beijing:Chinese
   Medical Association, 27 May 2003, p44.
27
   Wong T et al. Late recognition of SARS in a nosocomial outbreak, Toronto,
   Canada. Emerging Infectious Diseases [submitted].
28
   McDonald LC et al. SARS in healthcare facilities, Toronto and Taiwan. Emerging
   Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10:777–781.
29
   Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Severe acute respiratory syndrome,
   Singapore, 2003. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 2003, 52:405–411.
30
   Low DE, McGeer A. SARS: one year later. New England Journal of Medicine,
   2003, 349:2381–2382.
31
   Svoboda T et al. Public health measures to control the spread of severe acute
   respiratory syndrome during the outbreak in Toronto. New England Journal
   of Medicine, 2004, 350:2352–2361.
32
   Ha LD et al. Lack of SARS transmission among public hospital workers, Viet
   Nam. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10:265–268.
33
   Scales DC et al. Illness in intensive care staff after brief exposure to severe
   acute respiratory syndrome. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10:1205–
   1210 .
34
   Lau JT et al. SARS in three categories of hospital workers, Hong Kong. Emerging
   Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10:1399–1404.
35
   Tomlinson B, Cockram C. SARS: experience at Prince of Wales Hospital, Hong
   Kong. Lancet, 2003, 361:1486–1487.
36
   Lau JT et al. Probable secondary infections in households of SARS patients in
   Hong Kong. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10:235–243.
37
   Goh DL-M et al. Secondary household transmission of SARS, Singapore.
   Emerging Infectious Diseases [serial online] 2004 February [date cited] (http:/
   /www.cdc.gov/ncidod/EID/vol10no2/03-0676.htm).
38
   Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Efficiency of quarantine during
   an epidemic of severe acute respiratory syndrome, Beijing, China, 2003.
   Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 2003, 52:1037.
39
   World Health Organization. SARS outbreak in the Philippines. Weekly
   Epidemiological Record, 2003, 78:189–192.




                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   195
             40
                Health Canada. Learning from SARS. Renewal of public health in Canada. A
                report of the National Advisory Committee on SARS and Public Health, October
                2003 (http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/english/pdf/sars/sars-e.pdf).
             41
                Olsen SJ et al. Transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome on aircraft.
                New England Journal of Medicine, 2003:349:2414-20.
             42
                Chiu RWK, Chim SSC, Lo YMD. Molecular epidemiology of SARS – from
                Amoy Gardens to Taiwan. New England Journal of Medicine, 2003, 349:1875–
                1876.
             43
                Health Canada. Summary of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) Cases:
                Canada and International. Ottawa, 16 April 2003 (http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/
                pphb-dgspsp/sars-sras/eu-ae/sars20030416_e.html, accessed 1 April 2005).
             44
                Wilder-Smith A, Paton NI, Goh KT. Low risk of severe acute respiratory
                syndrome on airplanes: the Singapore experience. Tropical Medicine and
                International Health, 2003, 8:1035–1037.
             45
                Desenclos JC et al. Introduction of SARS in France, March–April 2003. Emerging
                Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10:195–200.
             46
                Wang M et al. Study on the epidemiology and measures for control of severe
                acute respiratory syndrome in Guangzhou City (English abstract). In collection
                of papers on SARS published in Chinese Medical Association Journals. Beijing:
                Chinese Medical Association, 27 May 2003:50.
             47
                Leung TF et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in children:
                epidemiology, presentation and management. Paediatric Respiratory
                Reviewsm, 2003, 4:334–339.
             48
                Ng PC et al. SARS in newborns and children. Biology of the Neonate, 2004,
                85:293–298.
             49
                Chan WM et al. Epidemiologic linkage and public health implication of a
                cluster of severe acute respiratory syndrome in an extended family. The
                Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal, 2004, 23(12):1156–1159.
             50
                Hon KLE et al. Clinical presentations and outcome of severe acute respiratory
                syndrome in children. Lancet, 2003, 361:1701–1703.
             51
                Fong NC et al. Adolescent twin sisters with severe acute respiratory syndrome
                (SARS). Paediatrics, 2004, 113:146–149.
             52
                Wong SF et al. Pregnancy and perinatal outcomes of women with severe
                acute respiratory syndrome. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
                2004, 191:292–297.
             53
                Lam CM et al. A case-controlled study comparing clinical course and outcomes
                of pregnant and non-pregnant women with severe acute respiratory syndrome.
                British Journal of Gynaecology, 2004, 111:771–774.
             54
                Shek CC et al. Infants born to mothers with severe acute respiratory syndrome.
                Pediatrics, 2003, 112:e254–e256.




      SARS: How a global
196   epidemic was stopped
55
   Lee HKK et al. Asymptomatic severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated
   coronavirus infection. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2003, 9:1491–1492.
56
   Leung GM et al. SARS-CoV antibody prevalence in all Hong Kong patient
   contacts Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10:1653–1656.
57
   Rainer TH et al. The spectrum of severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated
   coronavirus infection. Annals of Internal Medicine, 2004, 140:614–619.
58
   Yu IT, Sung JJ. The epidemiology of the outbreak of severe acute respiratory
   syndrome (SARS) in Hong Kong: what we do know and what we don’t.
   Epidemiology and Infection, 2004, 132:781–786.
59
   Chinese University of Hong Kong. Territory-wide SARS seroprevalence study
   suggests Hong Kong is not a human reservoir for SARS coronavirus. Hong
   Kong, 2004 (http://www.cuhk.edu.hk/ipro/pressrelease/040315e.htm, accessed
   26 October 2004).
60
   Hsueh P-R et al. SARS antibody test for serosurveillance. Emerging Infectious
   Diseases, 2004, 10:1558–1562.
61
   Li G et al. Mild severe acute respiratory syndrome. Emerging Infectious Diseases,
   2003, 9:1182–1183.
62
   Lim PL et al. Laboratory-acquired severe acute respiratory syndrome. New
   England Journal of Medicine, 2004, 350:1740–1745.
63
   Vu TH et al. SARS in Northern Viet Nam. New England Journal of Medicine,
   2003, 348:2035.
64
   Lloyd-Smith JO, Galvani AP, Getz W. Curtailing transmission of severe acute
   respiratory syndrome within a community and its hospital. Proceedings of the
   Royal Society London, B series, 2003, 270:1979–1989.
65
   Lipsitch M et al. Transmission dynamics and control of severe acute respiratory
   syndrome. Science, 2003, 300:1966–1970.
66
   World Health Organization. Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome – Singapore.
   Weekly Epidemiological Record, 2003, 78:157–162.
67
   Gopalakrishna G et al. SARS transmission and hospital containment. Emerging
   Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10:395–400.
68
   Peiris JSM et al. The severe acute respiratory syndrome. New England Journal
   of Medicine, 2003, 349:2431–2441.
69
   Shen Z et al. Superspreading SARS events, Beijing, 2003. Emerging Infectious
   Diseases, 2004, 10:256–260.
70
   Xie S et al. Analyses of one case of severe acute respiratory syndrome “super-
   transmitter” and chain of transmission. Chinese Journal of Epidemiology, 2003,
   24:449–453.
71
   Poutanen SM et al. Identification of severe acute respiratory syndrome in
   Canada. New England Journal of Medicine, 2003, 348:1995–2005.




                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                       epidemic was stopped   197
             72
                Li Y et al. Predicting super spreading events during the 2003 severe acute
                respiratory syndrome epidemics in Hong Kong and Singapore. American Journal
                of Epidemiology, 2004, 160:719–728.
             73
                Riley S et al. Transmission dynamics of the aetiological agent of severe acute
                respiratory syndrome (SARS) in Hong Kong: the impact of public health
                interventions. Science, 2003, 1961–1966.
             74
                Lai PC et al. Understanding the spatial clustering of severe acute respiratory
                syndrome (SARS) in Hong Kong. Environmental Health Perspectives, 2004,
                112:1550–1556.




      SARS: How a global
198   epidemic was stopped
           21 ANIMAL
         CORONAVIRUSES


CORONAVIRUS         FAMILY
    The family Coronaviridae comprises three genera: Coronavirus, Torovirus,
and Arterivirus—enveloped, positive-strand RNA viruses with nonsegmented
genomes that share similarities in genome organization and expression.
Historically, the genus Coronavirus comprised three antigenically and genetically
distinct groups [Table 21.1]. The newly emerged SARS/SARS-like coronaviruses
(CoVs) are only distantly related genetically to known CoVs and provisionally
compose group IV,1,2,3 or a subgroup of group II.4 These CoVs include human,1,5,6
civet cat, and raccoon dog isolates.7
    All CoVs contain at least four structural proteins: the nucleocapsid (N) protein,
the protruding spike (S) glycoprotein (cleaved or uncleaved depending on the
CoV species), the integral membrane glycoprotein (M), and the envelope protein.8
Several group II CoVs including bovine CoV (BCoV) also contain a surface
hemagglutinin-esterase (HE), which has homology with the HE of group C
influenza viruses suggesting a prior recombination event between these two
viruses.8 The S (and HE when present) functions in viral attachment and fusion
and induction of neutralizing antibodies. Except for a very large RNA polymerase
gene with two open reading frames (ORFs), the remaining CoV nonstructural
protein ORFs are diverse in number, size, and genome arrangement.8


RESPIRATORY AND ENTERIC ANIMAL                   CORONAVIRUSES
   Animal CoVs cause a broad spectrum of diseases in their hosts including
enteric, respiratory, reproductive, neurologic, hepatic, nephritic, and generalized
systemic disease [Table 21.1]. They infect diverse host species (humans, wild
and domestic animals, avian species, rodents), producing both acute and
persistent infections of variable severity. Because both pneumonia and diarrhoea
occur in SARS cases, this review gives a brief overview of key aspects of respiratory
and enteric animal CoV infections with potential analogies to SARS-CoV. A
more detailed review of these animal CoVs with comparisons to SARS is available.9




                                                                         SARS: How a global
                                                                        epidemic was stopped   199
                 Table 21.1 Members of the Coronavirus genus, target tissues, and diseases
                                                                                 Disease/infection site
             Genetic group        Virus              Host         Respiratory    Enteric       Other

             I                    HCoV-229E          Human        X upper
                                  TGEV               Pig          X upper        X SI
                                  PRCV               Pig          X upper/lung                 Viremia
                                  PEDV               Pig                         X SI, Colon
                                  FIPV/FCoV          Cat          X upper        X SI          Systemic
                                  CCoV               Dog                         X SI
                                  RaCoV              Rabbit
                                                                                               Systemic

             II                   HCoV-OC43          Human        X upper        BCoV? a
                                  MHV                Mouse                       X             Hepatitis, CNS, systemic,
                                  RcoV               Rat          X                            eye, salivary glands
                                  (sialodocry-
                                  adenitis)
                                  HEV                Pig          X                            CNS
                                  BCoV               Cattle       X upper/lung   X SI, Colon

             III                  IBV                Chicken      X upper        X             Kidney, oviduct
                                  TCoV (TECoV)       Turkey                      X SI

             IV?                  SARSCoV            Human        X lung         X?            Viremia, kidney?
             IIA?                 Civet cat          Himalayan    X              X             subclinical?
                                                     palm civet
                                                     Raccoon
                                                     dog
                                  Raccoon dog CoV                 ?              X             subclinical?

             SI = small intestine; CNS = central nervous system; ? = unknown
             a
                 Possibly a BCoV-like CoV from a child10



             EMERGENCE                OF NEW         COVS
                 Like SARS, new CoVs like the group I porcine epidemic diarrhoea virus
             (PEDV) in pigs have arisen from unknown sources. PEDV caused fatal diarrhoeal
             disease in naive populations, then diminished in severity and became endemic
             as the population acquired immunity.11 PEDV is genetically more closely related
             to human CoV 229E than to the other animal group I CoVs,12 and, unlike the
             other group I CoVs, it grows only in Vero cells like SARS-CoV,13 raising intriguing,
             but unanswered, questions about its origin.
                 New animal CoVs with altered tissue tropisms (the preferred tissue that the
             virus grows in) and virulence may also arise spontaneously from existing strains.
             The group I porcine respiratory CoV (PRCV) is a naturally occurring S gene
             deletion mutant of the highly virulent porcine enteric transmissible gastroenteritis


      SARS: How a global
200   epidemic was stopped
virus (TGEV).14,15 PRCV strains emerged independently in Europe and the United
States of America in the 1980s, as shown by differences in the sizes of the 5’ end
S gene deletion region (621–681 nucleotides). Deletion of this region presumably
accounted for altered tissue tropism (from enteric to respiratory) and reduced
virulence of the PRCV strains.16,17


SIMILARITIES       TO SARS CORONAVIRUS
    PRCV has several similarities to SARS-CoV, including clinical signs of fever,
dyspnoea, polypnoea, and anorexia and less coughing and rhinitis. It spreads
by droplets and replicates in the lung at high levels (107–108 TCID50) producing
interstitial pneumonia (affecting 5%–60% of the lung). It infects lung epithelial
cells and possibly macrophages, resulting in bronchiolar infiltration of
mononuclear cells, lymphohistiocytic exudates, and epithelial cell necrosis.14,15,18,19
PRCV induces transient viraemia with virus also detected from nasal secretions,
tonsil, and trachea. PRCV further replicates in undefined cells in the intestinal
lamina propria, but without inducing villous atrophy or diarrhoea and with
limited faecal shedding.15 Recently, however, faecal isolates of PRCV were
detected with minor (point mutations) in the S gene compared with the nasal
isolates from the same pig.20 Such observations suggest the presence of CoV
quasispecies in the host with some strains more adapted to the intestine, a
potential corollary for the faecal shedding of SARS-CoV. The widespread
dissemination of PRCV in Europe has displaced the more virulent TGEV, acting
as a natural vaccine.14,15
    Although not yet evident for SARS-CoV, the ability of certain CoVs to persist
in their host also provides a longer opportunity for new mutants to be selected
with altered tissue tropisms and virulence from among the viral RNA quasispecies
(or swarm of viruses). An example is the virulent systemic variant, the group I
CoV feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV), which very likely arises from
persistent infection of cats with the less virulent feline enteric CoV.21,22


THE ROLE OF COFACTORS
   Respiratory and enteric CoV infections in the natural animal host (swine,
cattle, poultry) have provided important information on CoV disease
pathogenesis that is potentially applicable to SARS-CoV. Enteric CoV infections
(TGEV, BCoV) alone often cause fatal infections in young animals. However, in
adults, respiratory CoV infections are more severe or often fatal when combined
with other factors including respiratory co-infections (viruses, bacteria) and stress
and transport of animals (shipping fever of cattle).27,28,29,30
   Underlying disease or respiratory co-infections, dose, aerosols, and route of
infection and immunosuppression (corticosteroids) are all potential cofactors




                                                                           SARS: How a global
                                                                          epidemic was stopped   201
             related to the severity of SARS. These cofactors can also exacerbate the severity
             of infectious bronchitis virus (IBV), BCoV, TGEV, or PRCV infections


             PNEUMOENTERIC CORONAVIRUSES
                 SARS may be pneumoenteric like group II BCoVs.9 Besides the respiratory
             disease complex, shipping fever, BCoV causes two other distinct clinical
             syndromes in cattle: calf diarrhoea and winter dysentery with hemorrhagic
             diarrhoea in adults [Table 21.1].9,23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31 On the basis of BCoV antibody
             seroprevalence, the virus is ubiquitous in cattle worldwide. All BCoV isolates
             from both enteric and respiratory infections are antigenically similar and are
             pneumoenteric, inducing both nasal and faecal shedding, often with lung, and
             invariably with intestinal, lesions in inoculated calves.9,32,33 Only point mutations,
             but not deletions have been detected in the S gene between enteric and
             respiratory BCoV isolates, including ones from the same animal.34,35 Subclinical
             nasal and faecal virus shedding were detected in BCoV-expermentally- infected
             calves challenged with heterologous BCoV strains,32,33 confirming field studies
             showing that repeated upper respiratory BCoV infections occur frequently in
             calves and that subclinically infected animals may be reservoirs for BCoV.36
                 Shipping fever is recognized as a multifactorial, polymicrobial respiratory
             disease complex in young adult feedlot cattle. BCoV infections are common in
             feedlot cattle with several factors exacerbating BCoV respiratory disease and
             the shipping fever disease complex.27,28,29,30 The shipping of cattle long distances
             in close confinement to feedlots and the commingling of cattle from several
             farms create physical stresses that overwhelm the animal’s defence mechanisms
             and provide close contact for exposure to new pathogens or strains not previously
             encountered.
                 For shipping fever, various predisposing factors (viruses, stress) allow
             commensal bacteria of the nasal cavity (Mannheimia haemolytica, Pasteurella
             sp, Mycoplasma sp, etc.) to infect the lungs, leading to fatal fibrinous
             pneumonia.23,24,25,30 As with PRCV or SARS infections, antibiotic treatment of
             such individuals with massive release of bacterial lipopolysaccharides (LPS) could
             potentially precipitate the induction of proinflammatory cytokines, which may
             further worsen lung damage. Pigs infected with PRCV followed by a subclinical
             dose of E. coli LPS within 24 hours developed higher fever and more severe
             respiratory disease than when exposed to each agent alone, with the disease
             most likely accentuated by proinflammatory cytokines induced by the bacterial
             LPS in concert with the virus.37
                 Sequential infections of pigs with the arterivirus (family Coronaviridae) PRRSV,
             followed in five days by PRCV, significantly increased lung lesions and reduced
             weight gain compared with infections with each virus alone.19 The dual infections
             also led to more pigs shedding PRCV nasally for a prolonged period and,



      SARS: How a global
202   epidemic was stopped
surprisingly, to increased faecal shedding of PRCV. Pigs inoculated with PRCV
followed in two to three days by swine influenza A virus (SIV) had reduced SIV
lung titres but more severe lung lesions than the singly infected pigs.38 The high
levels of interferon (INF)-alpha induced by PRCV may have interfered with SIV
replication but also may have contributed to the increased lung lesions via
immunopathologic mechansims. Such studies are highly relevant to potential
dual infections with SARS-CoV and influenza virus and proposed treatments of
SARS patients with IFN-alpha.
    Experimental inoculation of pigs showed that administration of PRCV by
aerosol rather than the oronasal route, or in higher doses, resulted in higher
virus titres shed and longer shedding.39 Also, high PRCV doses induced more
severe respiratory disease than lower doses. Pigs given 108.5 TCID50 of PRCV had
more severe pneumonia and deaths than pigs exposed by contact,40 and higher
intranasal doses of another PRCV strain (AR310) induced moderate respiratory
disease whereas lower doses produced subclinical infections.18
    A recrudescence of BCoV faecal shedding was observed in one of four winter
dysentery BCoV–infected cows treated with dexamethasone.30 Similarly, treatment
of older pigs with dexamethasone prior to TGEV challenge led to profuse diarrhoea
and reduced lymphoproliferative responses in the treated pigs.41 These data
raise issues for corticosteroid treatment of SARS patients related to possible
transient immunosuppression leading to worsened respiratory disease or
increased and prolonged CoV shedding. Alternatively, corticosteroid treatment
may help reduce proinflammatory cytokine levels if they are found to play a
major role in lung immunopathology.


AVIAN RESPIRATORY CORONAVIRUS
    Unlike SARS, which targets the lung resulting in pneumonia, the avian group
III CoV infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) is a highly contagious upper respiratory
disease of chickens. It is spread by aerosol or possibly faecal-oral transmission
and distributed worldwide.42,43 Genetically and antigenically closely related CoVs
have been isolated from pheasants and turkeys,44,45 but in young turkeys, they
cause only enteritis. Respiratory infections of chickens are characterized by
upper respiratory clinical signs including tracheal rales, coughing, and
sneezing.42,43 IBV infection is most severe in chicks. IBV replicates in epithelial
cells of the trachea and bronchi, intestinal tract, oviduct, and kidney, causing
necrosis and oedema with small areas of pneumonia near large bronchi,
decreased egg production, and interstitial nephritis in the kidney.42,43 Whether
SAR-CoV also infects the kidney like IBV or is present in urine as a consequence
of the viremia it induces, is unkown. In older birds, severe disease or death
ensues from systemic E. coli co-infections after IBV damage to the respiratory
tract or Mycoplasma sp co-infections with IBV. 42,43 The IBV is recovered



                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   203
             intermittently from the respiratory tract for about 28 days after infection and
             from the faeces after clinical recovery, with the caecal tonsil being a possible
             reservoir for IBV persistence, similar to the persistence of FIPV in the intestine of
             cats.21 Unlike many group I or II CoVs or SARS-CoV, which have only one
             serotype, IBV has multiple serotypes, complicating its diagnosis and control.42,43


             INTERSPECIES       TRANSMISSION OF CORONAVIRUS
                 The likelihood that SARS is a zoonosis transmitted from wild animals is not
             unprecedented for CoVs in view of previously documented interspecies
             transmission of animal CoVs and wildlife reservoirs for CoV. For example, the
             antigenically closely related porcine (TGEV), canine, and feline CoV (FIPV) cross-
             infect pigs, with variable disease expression and cross-protection.9,15,28 Captive
             wild ruminants harbour CoVs antigenically like bovine CoV,46,47 and these CoVs
             experimentally infect calves.46 Bovine CoV can naturally infect mammalian
             species (humans, dogs),48,49 but they can also experimentally infect and cause
             disease even in diverse avian hosts.45 Clearly, CoVs can and have circumvented
             host species barriers to adapt to new hosts.


             VACCINE DEVELOPMENT
                 The need to target vaccines to protect mucosal tissues (lung, intestine) to
             prevent respiratory and enteric CoV infections has been and is still a major
             challenge for the design of effective animal or SARS-CoV vaccines. Existing CoV
             vaccines are often only marginally effective in the field. Live vaccines are usually
             more effective than killed vaccines for TGEV in pigs,15 and IBV in chickens.42
             Neutralizing IgG antibodies in the serum generally fail to correlate with
             protection, whereas IgA antibodies in the milk or intestine are a correlate of
             immunity to the enteric CoV TGEV.15,50 For the persistent systemic FIPV infection
             of cats, neutralizing serum IgG antibodies to the S protein not only fail to protect
             but exacerbate disease by contributing to the immunopathology.51 For both
             TGEV and IBV, priming with live virus followed by boosting with killed virus
             was an effective strategy to raise protective mucosal immunity.15 Subunit vaccines
             including the S protein were only partially effective unless delivered via an
             effective live replicating vector (like adenovirus) that preserved conformationally
             dependent antigenic sites on the S protein and induced local neutralizing
             antibody responses.15 Although highly effective vaccines for many animal CoV
             infections are still elusive, understanding the basis for their successes and failures
             provides invaluable lessons for the development of SARS vaccines.




      SARS: How a global
204   epidemic was stopped
SUMMARY
    Studies of animal CoV infections can improve our understanding of the
similarities and divergence of CoV disease pathogenesis and targets for control.
Many unanswered questions for SARS pathogenesis are highly relevant to
strategies for the prevention and control of SARS. What is the initial site of viral
replication? Is SARS-CoV pneumoenteric like BCoV with variable degrees of
infection of the intestinal and respiratory tracts and disease precipitated by the
co-factors discussed or unknown variables? Alternatively, is SARS primarily
targeted to the lung like PRCV with faecal shedding of swallowed virus and
with undefined sequelae contributing to the diarrhoea cases? Does SARS-CoV
infect the lung directly or via viraemia after initial replication in another site
(oral cavity, tonsil, upper respiratory tract) and does it productively infect
secondary target organs (intestine, kidney) via viraemia after replication in the
lung? Finally, the persistent, macrophage-tropic, systemic FIPV infection of cats
presents yet another CoV disease model and a dilemma for attempted control
strategies because antibodies enhance FIPV disease, making protection by vaccine
difficult.
    The suspected zoonotic origin of SARS CoV [see Chapter 24], and the
recognized propensity of several CoVs to cross species barriers illustrate the
need for more animal transmission studies to understand how virus circumvents
the host-species barrier and adapts to new host species. The SARS epidemic
should generate new investigations of fundamental research questions applicable
to SARS-CoV and the other newly emerging or re-emerging zoonotic human
diseases, many of which, like SARS-CoV are caused by highly variable RNA
viruses.52


REFERENCES
1
    Drosten C et al. Identification of a novel coronavirus in patients with severe
    acute respiratory syndrome. New England Journal of Medicine, 2003,
    348:1967–1976.
2
    Marra MA et al. The genome sequence of the SARS-associated coronavirus.
    Science, 2003, 300:1399–404.
3
    Rota PA et al. Characterization of a novel coronavirus associated with severe
    acute respiratory syndrome. Science, 2003, 300:1394–1399.
4
    Snijder EJ et al. Unique and conserved features of genome and proteome of
    SARS-coronavirus, an early split-off from the coronavirus grou: p 2 lineage.
    Journal of Molecular Biology, 2003, 331:991–1004.




                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                       epidemic was stopped   205
             5
                Marra MA et al. The genome sequence of the SARS-associated coronavirus.
                Science, 2003, 300:1399–404.
             6
                Rota PA et al. Characterization of a novel coronavirus associated with severe
                acute respiratory syndrome. Science, 2003, 300:1394–1399.
             7
                Guan Y et al. Isolation and characterization of viruses related to the SARS
                coronavirus from animals in southern China. Science, 2003, 302:276–278.
             8
                Lai MMC, Cavenagh D. The molecular biology of coronaviruses. Advances in
                Virus Research, 1997, 48:1–100.
             9
                Saif LJ. Comparative biology of coronaviruses: lessons for SARS. In Peiris M,
                ed. SARS: The first new plague of the 21st century, Oxford, UK, Blackwell
                Publishing, 2005 (in press).
             10
                Zhang XM et al. Biologic and genetic characterization of a hemagglutinating
                coronavirus isolated from a diarrhoeic child. Journal of Medical Virology,
                1994, 44:152–161.
             11
                Pensaert MB. Porcine epidemic diarrhea. In Straw B. et al., eds. Diseases of
                Swine, 8th ed. Ames, Iowa, Iowa State Press, 1999:179–185.
             12
                Duarte M et al. Sequence analysis of the porcine epidemic diarrhea virus
                genome between the nucleocapsid and spike protein genes reveals a
                polymorphic ORF. Virology, 1994, 198:466–476.
             13
                Hoffman M, Wyler R. Propagation of the virus of porcine epidemic diarrhea
                in cell culture. Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 1988, 26:2235–2239.
             14
                Laude H, Van Reeth K, Pensaert M. Porcine respiratory coronavirus: molecular
                features and virus-host interactions. Veterinary Research, 1993, 24:125–150.
             15
                Saif LJ, Wesley R. Transmissible gastroenteritis virus. In Straw B. et al., eds.
                Diseases of Swine, 8th ed. Ames, Iowa, Iowa State Press, 1999:295–325.
             16
                Ballesteros ML, Sanchez CM, Enjuanes L. Two amino acid changes at the N-
                terminal of the transmissible gastroenteritis coronavirus spike protein result in
                the loss of enteric tropism. Virology, 1997, 227:378–388.
             17
                Sanchez CM et al. Targeted recombination demonstrates that the spike gene
                of transmissible gastroenteritis coronavirus is a determinant of its enteric
                tropism and virulence. Journal of Virology, 1999, 73:7607–7618.
             18
                Halbur PG et al. Experimental reproduction of pneumonia in gnotobiotic
                pigs with porcine respiratory coronavirus isolate AR310. Journal of Veterinary
                Diagnostic Investigation, 1993, 5:184–188.
             19
                Hayes JR. Evaluation of dual infection of nursery pigs with US strains of porcine
                reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus and porcine respiratory
                coronavirus [master’s thesis]. Columbus, Ohio, The Ohio State University,
                2000.
             20
                Costantini V et al. Respiratory and enteric shedding of porcine respiratory
                coronavirus (PRCV) in sentinel weaned pigs and sequence of the partial S
                gene of the PRCV isolates. Archives of Virology, 2004, 149:957-974.



      SARS: How a global
206   epidemic was stopped
21
   Herrewegh AAPM et al. Persistence and evolution of feline coronavirus in a
   closed cat-breeding colony. Virology, 1997, 234:349–363.
22
   Vennema H et al. A comparison of the genomes of FECVs and FIPVs and what
   they tell us about the relationships between feline coronaviruses and their
   evolution. Feline Practitioner, 1995, 23:40–44.
23
   Lathrop SL et al. Association between infection of the respiratory tract
   attributable to bovine coronavirus and health and growth performance of
   cattle in feedlots. American Journal of Veterinary Research, 2000, 61:1062–
   1066.
24
   Storz J et al. Coronavirus isolation from nasal swab samples in cattle with
   signs of respiratory tract disease after shipping. Journal of American Veterinary
   Medical Association, 1996, 208:1452–1455.
25
   Storz J et al. Coronavirus and Pasteurella infections in bovine shipping fever
   pneumonia and Evan’s criteria for causation. Journal of Clinical Microbiology,
   2000, 38:3291–3298.
26
   Hasoksuz M et al. Isolation of bovine respiratory coronaviruses from feedlot
   cattle and comparison of their biologic and antigenic properties with bovine
   enteric coronaviruses. American Journal of Veterinary Research, 1999,
   60:1227–1233.
27
   Cho KO et al. Evaluation of concurrent shedding of bovine coronavirus via
   the respiratory and enteric route in feedlot cattle. American Journal of Veterinary
   Research, 2001, 62:1436–1441.
28
   Saif LJ, Heckert RA. Enteric coronaviruses. In: Saif LJ, Theil KW, eds. Viral
   Diarrheas of Man and Animals, Boca Raton, Florida, CRC Press, 1990:185–
   252.
29
   Tsunemitsu H, Saif LJ. Antigenic and biological comparisons of bovine
   coronaviruses derived from neonatal calf diarrhea and winter dysentery of
   adult cattle. Archives of Virology, 1995, 140:1303–1311.
30
   Tsunemitsu H, Smith DR, Saif LJ. Experimental inoculation of adult dairy
   cows with bovine coronavirus and detection of coronavirus in feces by RT-
   PCR. Archives of Virology, 1999, 144:167–175.
31
   Traven M et al. Experimental reproduction of winter dysentery in lactating
   cows using BCV: comparison with BCV infection in milk-fed calves. Veterinary
   Microbiology, 2001, 81:127–151.
32
   Cho KO et al. Cross-protection studies of respiratory, calf diarrhea and winter
   dysentery coronavirus strains in calves and RT-PCR and nested PCR for their
   detection. Archives of Virology, 2001, 146:2401–2419.
33
   El-Kanawati Z et al. Infection and cross-protection studies of winter dysentery
   and calf diarrhea bovine coronavirus strains in colostrum-deprived and
   gnotobiotic calves. American Journal of Veterinary Research, 1996, 57:48–
   53.



                                                                          SARS: How a global
                                                                         epidemic was stopped   207
             34
                Chouljenko VN et al. Comparison of genomic and predicted amino acid
                sequences of respiratory and enteric bovine coronaviruses isolated from the
                same animal with fatal shipping pneumonia. Journal of General Virology, 2001,
                82:2927–2933.
             35
                Hasoksuz M et al. Molecular analysis of the S1 subunit of the spike glycoprotein
                of respiratory and enteric bovine coronavirus isolates. Virus Research, 2002,
                84:101–109.
             36
                Heckert RA, Saif LJ, Agnes AG. A longitudinal study of bovine coronavirus
                enteric and respiratory infections in dairy calves in two herds in Ohio.
                Veterinary Microbiology, 1990, 22:187.
             37
                Van Reeth K, Nauwynck H, Pensaert M. A potential role for tumour necrosis
                factor-alpha in synergy between porcine respiratory coronavirus and bacterial
                lipopolysaccharide in the induction of respiratory disease in pigs. Journal of
                Medical Microbiology, 2000, 49:613–620.
             38
                Van Reeth K, Pensaert MB. Porcine respiratory coronavirus-mediated
                interference against influenza virus replication in the respiratory tract of feeder
                pigs. American Journal of Veterinary Research, 1994, 55:1275–1281.
             39
                Van Cott JL et al. Antibody-secreting cells to transmissible gastroenteritis virus
                and porcine respiratory coronavirus in gut- and bronchus-associated lymphoid
                tissues of neonatal pigs. Journal of Immunology, 1993, 150:3990–4000.
             40
                Jabrane A, Girard C, Elazhary Y. Pathogenicity of porcine respiratory
                coronavirus isolated in Quebec. Canadian Veterinary Journal, 1994, 35:86–
                92.
             41
                Shimizu M, Shimizu Y. Effects of ambient temperatures on clinical and immune
                responses of pigs infected with transmissible gastroenteritis virus. Veterinary
                Microbiology, 1979, 4:109–116.
             42
                Cavanagh D, Naqi S. Infectious bronchitis. In: Saif YM et al., eds. Diseases of
                Swine, 11th ed. Ames, Iowa, Iowa State Press, 2003:101–119.
             43
                Cook J, Mockett APA. Epidemiology of infectious bronchitis virus. In: Siddell
                SG, ed. The Coronaviridae. New York, Plenum Press, 1995:317–335.
             44
                Guy JS et al. Antigenic characterization of a turkey coronavirus identified in
                poult enteritis and mortality syndrome–affected turkeys. Avian Diseases, 1997,
                41:583–590.
             45
                Ismail MM et al. Experimental bovine coronavirus in turkey poults and young
                chickens. Avian Diseases, 2001, 45:157–163.
             46
                Tsunemitsu H et al. Isolation of coronaviruses antigenically indistinguishable
                from bovine coronavirus from a Sambar and white tailed deer and waterbuck
                with diarrhea. Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 1995, 33:3264–3269.
             47
                Majhdi F, Minocha HC, Kapil S. Isolation and characterization of a coronavirus
                from elk calves with diarrhea. Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 1997, 35:2937–
                2942.
             48
                Zhang XM et al. Biologic and genetic characterization of a hemagglutinating

      SARS: How a global
208   epidemic was stopped
   coronavirus isolated from a diarrhoeic child. Journal of Medical Virology,
   1994, 44:152–161.
49
   Erles K et al. Detection of a novel canine coronavirus in dogs with respiratory
   disease. In: Proceedings of the 9th International Symposium on Nidoviruses.
   The Netherlands, 2003:49.
50
   Van Cott JL, Brim TA, Lunney J. Contribution of antibody secreting cells induced
   in mucosal lymphoid tissues of pigs inoculated with respiratory or enteric
   strains of coronavirus to immunity against enteric coronavirus challenge.
   Journal of Immunology, 1994, 152:3980–3990.
51
   Olsen CW. A review of feline infectious peritonitis virus: molecular biology,
   immunopathogenesis, clinical aspects, and vaccination. Veterinary
   Microbiology, 1993, 36:1–37.
52
   Taylor LH. Risk factors for human disease emergence. Philosophical Transactions
   of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 2001, 356:983–990.




                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   209
                              22 THE SARS
                             CORONAVIRUS
                               (SARS-COV)


                In March 2003, WHO alerted the world to the probability of a new disease,
             now designated as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). To find its cause,
             WHO immediately formed a virtual network of laboratories working on clinical
             specimens from patients with SARS.1 This network investigated patients from
             outbreaks in Viet Nam, Hong Kong (China), and Singapore and cases in
             Germany. Collectively, these laboratories were able to exclude a number of
             potential pathogens including influenza, as the cause of SARS. Detection of
             paramyxoviruses by electron microscopy and human metapneumovirus by
             reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and culture were
             reported in some patients with SARS,1 and there were also reports that Chlamydia
             had been observed in lungs of patients at autopsy in Guangdong.1 However,
             none of these agents could be detected in all patients at all sites. Between 21
             and 24 March, three laboratories in the WHO network reported that they had
             independently isolated a novel virus on FRhK-4 or Vero E6 cells.2,3,4 The virus
             was identified by electron microscopy to be a coronavirus. Similar virus particles
             were observed by electron microscopy in the lung biopsy of a patient with
             SARS.2 Genetic analysis appeared to indicate that this was a novel coronavirus.2,3,4
             This chapter provides an overview of this virus, now called SARS coronavirus
             (SARS-CoV).


             AETIOLOGY
                  Patients with SARS consistently seroconverted to SARS-CoV while there was
             little serological evidence of past infection in healthy controls, or in blood
             donations taken before the outbreak. Experimental inoculation of SARS-CoV
             into cynomolgous macaques resulted in a disease similar to SARS, satisfying the
             last of Koch’s postulates for establishing the aetiology of an infectious disease.5,6
                  The lack of serological evidence in human samples collected prior to 2002
             suggested that SARS-CoV was not a virus that had been previously circulating in
             humans. As with most novel, previously unrecognized viruses over the past two


      SARS: How a global
210   epidemic was stopped
decades, it was probable that SARS-CoV originated from an animal source [see
Chapter 24].


GENETIC CLUES
    Within weeks of the initial isolation of SARS-CoV, the viral genome had
been completely sequenced.7,8 These findings confirmed that SARS-CoV was
distinct from previously known animal and human coronaviruses across the full
extent of its genome. This excluded the possibility that SARS-CoV arose by the
natural or artificial recombination of the genomes of previously known
coronaviruses. The genome organization and phylogeny suggests that SARS-
CoV is probably a group II coronavirus, but only distantly related to other
coronaviruses in the group. 9 Its formal taxonomic position within the
Coronaviridae still has to be established by the International Committee on the
Taxonomy of Viruses.
    Studies on the molecular evolution of the virus confirmed the
epidemiological deduction10 that the global epidemic was linked to the index
patient in the Metropole Hotel [see Chapter 14].11,12,13,14 However, the earliest
cases of SARS in Guangdong Province, China, in late 2002 and January 2003,
as well as in Hong Kong in February 2003, were genetically more diverse.15,16
These early SARS-CoV isolates showed higher rates of nonsynonymous mutation,
suggesting that the virus was still adapting to the human host.14 Some of these
early SARS-CoV strains had an additional 29-nucleotide segment in ORF8. In
this regard, they were similar to SARS-CoV-like animal strains detected in markets
in Guangdong,16 supporting the contention that SARS had a zoonotic origin.


SPREAD
    In comparison with other respiratory viruses, SARS-CoV was unusually stable
in the environment. It stayed infective for many days even after it had dried on
surfaces or in faeces.17,18 This property may partly explain its infectivity in a
hospital setting through fomite and indirect contact. It is thought to have
contributed to the extent of the outbreak in the Amoy Gardens housing estate in
Hong Kong. 19 Other factors in hospital spread are procedures related to
intubation, ventilation, and oxygen supplementation, contributing to aerosolized
SARS droplets.20


PATHOGENESIS
    Infectious virus was detected in the faeces and urine as well as the respiratory
tract, indicating that SARS was a disseminated infection, not one confined to
the respiratory tract.21,22,23 The detection of infectious virus in the urine implies
that the virus spreads via a viraemic phase. While infectious virus has not been



                                                                         SARS: How a global
                                                                        epidemic was stopped   211
             conclusively documented in the peripheral blood, viral RNA is reproducibly
             detected in the serum 24 and peripheral white blood cells. 25 Viral RNA in
             respiratory secretions and faeces can be demonstrated by RT-PCR for three to
             four weeks or even longer.22 However, infectious virus is rarely isolated after the
             third week of illness,22,23 a finding that is consistent with the lack of evidence for
             transmission of SARS during convalescence.
                 Quantitative RT-PCR assays of SARS-CoV in the respiratory tract and the
             faeces revealed that viral load continues to increase during the first week of
             illness and peaks around the tenth to eleventh day of disease.21,26 This explains
             why, in the first five days of illness, transmission appeared to be less common.27
             Higher viral load in the serum at the time of admission,24 or in the respiratory
             tract in the second week of illness,28 correlates with poor prognosis, suggesting
             that continued viral replication plays a significant role in pathogenesis and that
             an effective antiviral agent would help improve the chances of recovery. While
             the window of opportunity for therapeutic intervention with an antiviral agent
             is relatively narrow in influenza (36 to 48 hours after the onset of disease), with
             SARS, the opportunity for clinical benefit may be wider. One aspect of
             pathogenesis that is not easily explained by direct viral cytolysis is the marked
             lymphopenia consistently observed in patients with SARS,29 because so far there
             is to date no evidence in vivo or in vitro that SARS-CoV infects lymphocytes or
             their precursors.
                 The pathological changes predominant in patients with SARS are diffuse
             alveolar damage, lung oedema, a mixed alveolar infiltrate with a preponderance
             of macrophages and hyaline membranes. The later stages of the disease show
             organizing diffuse alveolar damage with focal squamous metaplasia of the
             bronchial epithelium and fibrosis of the alveolar walls, as well as multinucleate
             giant cells of macrophage or epithelial cell origin.30,31 Electron microscopy, in
             situ hybridization, and immunohistological methods conclusively demonstrated
             virus infection in pneumocytes and enterocytes (epithelial cells of the lung alveoli
             and the intestine, respectively).32,33,34,35,36 There appears to be little cell damage
             or cell infiltrate in the intestinal mucosa, and the mechanisms leading to diarrhoea
             are unclear.
                 Like many other viral infections, SARS-CoV infection triggers a number of
             cytokine responses.37,38,39,40 It is not yet clear whether these play a role in
             pathogenesis.41 As with other coronaviruses, the spike protein of SARS-CoV is
             the critical determinant of viral attachment to the cell.42,43,44 The main functional
             receptor for SARS-CoV has been identified to be the metallopeptidase angiotensin
             converting enzyme 2 (ACE-2).45,46 ACE-2 is expressed on alveolar pneumocytes
             and enterocytes,47 within which the virus is known to replicate. However, not
             all cells that express ACE-2 support viral replication in vivo or in vitro.48
                 The glycosylated S protein has been shown to bind the C-type lectin DC-
             specific ICAM-3 grabbing non-integrin (DC-SIGN) expressed on dendritic cells,


      SARS: How a global
212   epidemic was stopped
which then mediate SARS-CoV infection in trans of cells that express human
ACE-2, but the DC-SIGN does not initiate SARS-CoV into the dendritic cells.42
Human CD209L (also known as L-SIGN) which is 77% identical to human DC-
SIGN, can also bind to S protein and mediate virus entry,49 but its role in initiating
productive virus replication remains unclear.
   A full-length infectious clone of SARS-CoV has been developed and will
permit a more detailed analysis of the virulence factors of the SARS-CoV through
the reverse genetics approach.50
   The genetics of host susceptibility or resistance are being explored although
the findings are still preliminary. HLA-B*4601 has been associated with severe
SARS disease in Taiwan, China,51 but the association has not been confirmed in
studies elsewhere.43 HLA-B*0703 has been associated with disease susceptibility,
and HLA-DRB1*0301 with resistance to SARS.52 The mechanisms underlying
these disease associations are still unclear.


SUMMARY
    SARS-CoV is a previously undetected coronavirus that has been confirmed
through several lines of evidence as the cause of SARS. Its survival in the
environment and in aerosols generated during medical procedures such as
nebulization promoted the spread of SARS-CoV. The SARS outbreak
demonstrated the potential for a novel, emerging viral disease to cause a
pandemic with a major global impact. The importance of global surveillance
measures to rapidly detect outbreaks of infectious diseases of potential
international significance, such as SARS, cannot be over-emphasized.53,54 The
experience gained from SARS also demonstrated the importance of international
coordination in responding to a major outbreak,55,56 and specifically the rapid
establishment of international networks of experts, as exemplified by the
laboratory network.1 The success of the laboratory network in rapidly isolating
and characterizing SARS-CoV was an important step in the battle to control the
spread of SARS, resulting in the development of diagnostic tools and, through
our knowledge of the aetiological agent, in being able to better understand the
transmission, pathogenesis, and ecology of the disease.


REFERENCES
1
    World Health Organization. A multicentre collaboration to investigate the
    cause of severe acute respiratory syndrome. Lancet, 2003, 361:1730–1733.
2
    Peiris JS et al. Coronavirus as a possible cause of severe acute respiratory
    syndrome. Lancet, 2003, 361:1319–1325.
3
    Ksiazek TG et al. A novel coronavirus associated with severe acute respiratory
    syndrome. New England Journal of Medicine, 2003, 348:1953–1966




                                                                          SARS: How a global
                                                                         epidemic was stopped   213
             4
                Drosten C et al. Identification of a novel coronavirus in patients with severe
                acute respiratory syndrome. New England Journal of Medicine, 2003,
                348:1967–1976.
             5
                Fouchier RA et al. Aetiology: Koch’s postulates fulfilled for SARS virus. Nature,
                2003, 423:240.
             6
                Kuiken T et al. Newly discovered coronavirus as the primary cause of severe
                acute respiratory syndrome. Lancet, 2003, 362:263–270.
             7
                 Marra MA et al. The genome sequence of the SARS associated coronavirus.
                Science, 2003, 300:1399–1404.
             8
                Rota PA et al. Characterization of a novel coronavirus associated with severe
                acute respiratory syndrome. Science, 2003, 300:1394–1399.
             9
                Snijder EJ et al. Unique and conserved features of genome and proteome of
                SARS-coronavirus: an early split-off from the coronavirus group 2 lineage.
                Journal of Molecular Biology, 2003, 331:991–1004.
             10
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Update: Outbreak of severe acute
                respiratory syndrome—worldwide, 2003. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
                Report, 2003, 52:241–248.
             11
                Ruan YJ et al. Comparative full-length genome sequence analysis of 14 SARS
                coronavirus isolates and common mutations associated with putative origins
                of infection. Lancet, 2003, 361:1779–1785.
             12
                Guan Y et al. Molecular epidemiology of the novel coronavirus that causes
                severe acute respiratory syndrome. Lancet, 2004, 363:99–104
             13
                Yeh SH et al. Characterization of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
                genomes in Taiwan: molecular epidemiology and genome evolution.
                Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 2004, 101:2542–2547;
             14
                The Chinese SARS Molecular Epidemiology Consortium. Molecular evolution
                of the SARS coronavirus during the course of the SARS epidemic in China.
                Science, 2004, 303:1666–1669.
             15
                Zhong NS et al. Epidemiology and cause of severe acute respiratory syndrome
                (SARS) in Guangdong, People’s Republic of China, in February 2003. Lancet,
                2003, 362:1353–1358.
             16
                Guan Y et al. Isolation and characterization of viruses related to SARS
                coronavirus from animals in southern China. Science, 2003, 302:276–278.
             17
                First data on stability and resistance of SARS coronavirus compiled by members
                of WHO laboratory network. Geneva, World Health Orgization, 2003 (http:/
                /www.who.int/csr/sars/survival_2003_05_04/en/index.html, accessed 1 April
                2005).
             18
                Rabenau HF et al. Stability and inactivation of SARS coronavirus. Medical
                Microbiology and Immunology, 2005, 194:1-6.
             19
                Yu IT et al. Evidence of airborne transmission of the severe acute respiratory
                syndrome virus. New England Journal of Medicine, 2004, 350:1731–1739.



      SARS: How a global
214   epidemic was stopped
20
   Somogyi R et al. Dispersal of respiratory droplets with open versus closed
   oxygen delivery masks. Chest, 2004, 125:1155–1157.
21
   Peiris JS et al. Clinical progression and viral load in a community outbreak of
   coronavirus-associated SARS pneumonia: a prospective study. Lancet, 2003,
   361:1767–1772.
22
   Chan KH et al. Detection of SARS coronavirus in patients with suspected
   SARS. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10:294–299.
23
   Chan PK et al. Laboratory diagnosis of SARS. Emerging Infectious Diseases,
   2004, 10: 825–831.
24
   Ng EK et al. Serial analysis of the plasma concentration of SARS coronavirus
   RNA in pediatric patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome. Clinical
   Chemistry, 2003, 49:2085–2088.
25
   Li L et al. SARS-coronavirus replicates in mononuclear cells of peripheral
   blood (PBMCs) from SARS patients. Journal of Clinical Virology, 2003, 28:239–
   244.
26
    Cheng PKC et al. Viral shedding patterns of coronavirus in patients with
   probable severe acute respiratory syndrome. Lancet, 2004, 363:1699–1700.
27
   Lipsitch M et al. Transmission dynamics and control of severe acute respiratory
   syndrome. Science, 2003, 300:1966–1970.
28
   Hung IFN et al. Viral loads in clinical specimens and SARS manifestations.
   Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10:1550–1557.
29
   Wong RSM et al. Haematological manifestations in patients with severe acute
   respiratory syndrome: retrospective analysis. British Medical Journal, 2003,
   326:1358–1362.
30
   Nicholls JM et al. Lung pathology of fatal severe acute respiratory syndrome.
   Lancet, 2003, 361:1773–1778.
31
   Franks TJ et al. Lung pathology of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS): a
   study of 8 autopsy cases from Singapore. Human Pathology, 2003, 34:743–
   748.
32
   Chow KC et al. Detection of severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated
   coronavirus in pneumocytes of the lung. Americal Journal of Clinical Pathology,
   2004, 121:574–580.
33
   To KF et al. Tissue and cellular tropism of the coronavirus associated with
   severe acute respiratory syndrome: an in situ hybridization study of fatal cases.
   Journal of Pathology, 2004, 202:157–163.
34
   Nakajima N et al. SARS coronavirus-infected cells in lung detected by new in
   situ hybridization technique. Japanese Journal of Infectious Diseases, 2003,
   56:139–141.
35
   Chong PY et al. Analysis of deaths during the severe acute respiratory syndrome
   (SARS) epidemic in Singapore: challenges in determining a SARS diagnosis.
   Archives of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 2004, 128:195–204.



                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                       epidemic was stopped   215
             36
                Leung WK et al. Enteric involvement of severe acute respiratory syndrome-
                associated coronavirus infection. Gastroenterology, 2003, 125:1011–1017.
             37
                Wong CK et al. Plasma inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in severe
                acute respiratory syndrome. Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 2004,
                136:95–103.
             38
                Zhang Y et al. Analysis of serum cytokines in patients with severe acute
                respiratory syndrome. Infection and Immunity, 2004, 72:4410–4415.
             39
                Ng PC et al. Inflammatory cytokine profile in children with severe acute
                respiratory syndrome. Pediatrics, 2004, 113(1): e7-e14 (http://
                www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/full/113/1/e7, accessed 1 April 2005).
             40
                Jones BM et al. Prolonged disturbance of in vitro cytokine production in patients
                with severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) treated with ribavirin and
                steroids. Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 2004, 135:467–473.
             41
                Openshaw PJM. What does the peripheral blood tell you in SARS? Clinical
                and Experimental Immunology, 2004, 136:11–12.
             42
                Yang ZY et al. pH-dependent entry of severe acute respiratory syndrome
                coronavirus is mediated by the spike glycoprotein and enhanced by dendritic
                cell transfer through DC-SIGN. Journal of Virology, 2004, 78:5642–5650.
             43
                Simmons G et al. Characterization of severe acute respiratory syndrome-
                associated coronavirus (SARS CoV) spike glycoprotein-mediated viral entry.
                Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 2004, 101:4240–4245,
             44
                Hofmann H et al. Susceptibility to SARS coronavirus S protein-derived infection
                correlates with expression of angiotensin converting enzyme 2 and infection
                can be blocked by soluble receptor. Biochemical and Biophysical Research
                Communications, 2004, 319:1216–1221.
             45
                Li W et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 is a functional receptor for the
                SARS coronavirus. Nature, 2003, 426:450–454.
             46
                Wang P et al. Expression cloning of functional receptor used by SARS
                coronavirus. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications, 2004,
                315:439–444.
             47
                Hamming I et al. Tissue distribution of ACE-2 protein, the functional receptor
                for SARS coronavirus: a first step in understanding SARS pathogenesis. Journal
                of Pathology, 2004, 203:631–637.
             48
                To KF, Lo AWI. Exploring the pathogenesis of severe acute respiratory syndrome
                (SARS): the tissue distribution of the coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and its putative
                receptor, angiotensin-converting-enzyme 2 (ACE-2). Journal of Pathology,
                2004, 203:740–743.
             49
                Jeffers SA et al. CD209L (L-SIGN) is a receptor for severe acute respiratory
                syndrome coronavirus. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA,
                2004, 101:15748–15753.




      SARS: How a global
216   epidemic was stopped
50
   Yount B et al. Reverse genetics with a full length infectious cDNA of severe
   acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus. Proceedings of the National Academy
   of Sciences USA, 2003, 100:12995–13000.
51
   Lin M et al. Association of HLA class 1 with severe acute respiratory syndrome
   coronavirus infection. BMC Medical Genetics, 2003, 4:9.
52
   Ng MHL et al. Association of human-leukocyte-antigen class 1 (B*0703) and
   class II (DRB1*0301) genotypes with susceptibility and resistance to the
   development of severe acute respiratory syndrome. Journal of Infectious
   Diseases, 2004, 190:515–518.
53
   Heymann DL et al. Hot spots in a wired world: WHO surveillance of emerging
   and re-emerging diseases. Lancet Infectious Diseases, 2001, 1:345–353.
54
   Smolinski MS, Hamburg MA, Lederberg J (eds). Microbial Threats to Health:
   Emergence, Detection and Response. Institute of Medicine, The National
   Academies Press, Washington, DC, 2003.
55
   Heymann DL. The international response to the outbreak of SARS in 2003.
   Philosophical Transactions of Royal Society, London, B. Biological Sciences,
   2004, 359:1127–1129.
56
   Mackenzie JS et al. The WHO response to SARS and preparations for the
   future. In: Knobler S, Mahmoud A, Lemon S, Mack A, Sivitz L, Oberholtzer K,
   eds. Learning from SARS: Preparing for the Next Disease Outbreak. Institute of
   Medicine, The National Academies Press, Washington DC, 2003; 42–50.




                                                                      SARS: How a global
                                                                     epidemic was stopped   217
                        23 LABORATORY
                         DIAGNOSTICS


               This chapter reviews the capabilities and limitations of the main methods of
            laboratory diagnostics of SARS. Several potentially good diagnostic approaches
            are not mentioned because they have not been evaluated extensively on clinical
            samples.


            ANTIBODY TESTING
                Screening. It became clear early during the 2003 epidemic that virtually all
            patients with a clinical picture of SARS develop specific IgG antibodies against
            SARS-coronavirus (SARS-CoV).1 In 92% of 417 probable SARS cases in Hong
            Kong (China), the IgG serum antibody titre rose four times or more between
            paired samples, using immunofluorescence assays (IFA).2 The time course of
            seroconversion using IFA was first documented in a cohort of 70 SARS patients
            from Hong Kong.3 IgG was detected within a mean of 20 (±5.1) days after the
            onset of symptoms. Another study of IFA found IgG in sera of six SARS patients
            starting from the ninth to the eighteenth day after the onset of illness.4 In general,
            a negative IgG result using IFA cannot exclude SARS, unless it is taken at least
            28 days from onset of symptoms.
                IFA has become the “method of choice” for serological testing (testing for
            antibodies). This is not only because IFA tests were the first methods available,
            but also because of other obvious advantages of the method, including its high
            general sensitivity and low technical requirements for setting up the method.
            However, experienced laboratory personnel are needed to interpret results and
            to prepare slides with infectious virus.
                Enzyme immunoassays (EIA) have been used in several studies to overcome
            these drawbacks. Such tests are easy to handle and do not require subjective
            interpretation of results. Recombinant test antigens can be used in EIA without
            risk of infection. Recombinant nucleocapsid protein of SARS-CoV or synthetic
            peptides homologous to the nucleocapsid or U274 proteins have proven to be
            appropriate test antigens in several studies [Table 23.1]. Sensitivities were largely
            concordant with IFA methods. One EIA study showed that IgM antibodies do
            not appear significantly earlier than IgG antibodies but disappear after about


      SARS: How a global
218   epidemic was stopped
three months from the onset of symptoms.5 Similarly, IgA antibodies were not
detected earlier or more often than IgG.6 Whether IgM testing may provide a
differentiation between old and ongoing infections is questionable because
detectable IgM antibodies do not develop in all patients with confirmed IgG
seroconversion.5,6

Table 23.1. Synopsis of EIA methods for antibody detection
Study               Antigen                Days after   Sensitivity     Specificity       Gold standard
                                           onset
Timani KA et al 7   Recombinant N          >20          16/16 (100%)    131/131 (100%)    Probable case
                                                                                          definition
Guan M et al8       Recombinant            16–65        74/74 (100%)    209/210 (99.5%)   Probable case
                    (Gst-N and Gst-U274)                                                  definition
Hsueh PR et al9     Peptides (S,M,N)       35–175       69/69 (100%)    1541/1541 (100%) Probable case
                                                                                         definition and
                                                                                         whole virus
                                                                                         ELISA
Chen W et al10      Whole virus            22–28        41/45 (91%)     NA               Probable case
                                                                                         definition
Chen W et al10      Recombinant N          12–43        100/106 (94%)   142/149 (95.3%)   Whole virus IFA
Chen W et al10      Recombinant            21–30        43/57 (75%)     385/385 (99.5%)   Suspected case
                    (Gst-N and Gst-U274)   >30          18/19 (95%)                       definition and IFA

Cumulative                                              (361/386) 94%   361/386 (99.6%)

ELISA, enzyme linked immunosorbent assay; IFA, immunofluorescence assays; NA, not applicable


    Confirmation. Although all published IFA and EIA methods have a specificity
well above 90% [Table 23.1], the risk of obtaining false-positive results with
any of these assays requires confirmatory testing by an alternative method.
Western blot (WB) and virus neutralization tests (NT) are currently recommended
methods used for serologic confirmation.
    WB potentially provides greater specificity because the numbers and
molecular weights of reactive test antigens can be used for interpreting results.
The sensitivity of WB, as compared with that of IFA or EIA, has been determined
to range between 85% and 100%.11,12 13 WB can thus confirm IFA or EIA results
in most patients.
    NT provides enhanced specificity by examining not only the binding of
antibodies to virus epitopes, but also their functional ability to interfere with
virus entry, which is a very specific process. A significant rise in NT titre can
reliably prove an infection. On the other hand, not all infected patients develop
enough neutralizing antibodies to provide a positive NT.
    Because NT is a cumbersome method, only few data exist on its clinical
sensitivity. Among 623 patients with SARS in Beijing, 86% tested positive for
neutralizing antibodies.14 In a cohort of 469 patients in Taiwan, China, several
of them sampled in the early phase of disease, NT was positive in 48% of patients,


                                                                                           SARS: How a global
                                                                                          epidemic was stopped   219
             as opposed to 58% in EIA.13 NT is an appropriate method for expert laboratories
             to provide definite confirmation of infection when virus cannot be detected.


             VIRUS      TESTING
                 Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The first methods
             for detecting SARS-CoV in clinical samples were described along with the primary
             identification of the agent.1,15,16 In each of these studies, RT-PCR detected SARS-
             CoV in most SARS patients, confirming the aetiology of the new disease. First-
             generation tests relied on conventional RT-PCR followed by agarose gel
             electrophoresis. A retrospective study compared two popular first-generation
             protocols.1,15 These tests were distributed via a WHO Internet resource during
             the 2003 epidemic.17 Nasopharyngeal aspirates, throat swabs, and urine and
             stool samples from serologically confirmed SARS patients in Hong Kong were
             tested. Sensitivities ranged between 50% and 72%, depending on the test and
             clinical material used [Table 23.2]. Crucially, the sensitivity of RT-PCR in
             respiratory samples reached reasonable levels only after one week of disease,
             leaving two thirds of patients who were later on confirmed with SARS undiagnosed
             on admission to hospital.3 Stool samples give the highest rates of detection, 10
             days after symptom onset, and are recommended.3

                        Table 23.2 Comparison of first-generation RT-PCR methods
                             Type of samplea                Sensitivity of first generation RT-PCR methods
                                                                 Peiris JS et al1       Drosten C et al 15
                               Nasopharyngeal aspriate                61%                      68%
                                    Throat swab                       65%                      72%
                                        Urine                         50%                      54%
                                        Stool                         58%                      63%

                       Clinical samples from 86 SARS patients, confirmed by seroconversion
                       Source: Yam WC et al. Evaluation of reverse transcription-PCR assays for rapid
                       diagnosis of severe acute respiratory syndrome associated with a novel coronavirus.
                       Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 2003, 41:4521–4524.


                 Different approaches have been explored to improve the sensitivity of RT-
             PCR. Testing two samples instead of one per patient increased detection rates
             slightly.17 The same was achieved by testing one sample per patient two times,
             increasing the chance of detection of randomly distributed RNA in low-
             concentration samples.18 Poon and colleagues increased the sample input volume
             in the RNA extraction, thereby improving the sensitivity of their first-generation
             RT-PCR from 22% to 44% in 50 nasopharyngeal aspirate samples.19 However,
             this approach might not work with every assay, since RT-PCR has limited capacity




      SARS: How a global
220   epidemic was stopped
to operate in the presence of background nucleic acids and other substances
interfering with amplification. Inhibition control reactions, either by parallel
testing of spiked patient samples or by internal inhibition control techniques,
are mandatory for reliable diagnostic performance.
    Real-time RT-PCR has been used early on, but only some laboratories could
conduct clinical evaluation with sufficiently large cohorts of patients. SARS-
CoV was detected in 80% of 50 nasopharyngeal aspirates on the first to the third
day after admission with a probe-based assay, as opposed to 44% with a first-
generation test.20 However, in most other studies available, different highly
optimized real-time RT-PCR assays provided sensitivities around or below 70%
in respiratory swabs and aspirates [Table 23.3]. Similar figures were obtained
for other types of clinical samples. Thus, real-time RT-PCR cannot be considered
more sensitive than conventional assays.
    The switching of the RT-PCR target gene within the SARS-CoV genome has
been proposed as another means to achieve better sensitivity. During replication,
coronaviruses generate an excess of subgenomic mRNA species, all of which
contain the nucleocapsid (N) gene.24 If virus-replicating cells were present in
clinical samples, one would expect a higher sensitivity in N-gene-based RT-
PCR. Though this hypothesis was supported by observations in experimental
animals, it could not be confirmed in three independent studies on SARS
patients.18,19,25
    Table 23.3 summarizes the results of some of the larger clinical evaluation
studies on SARS RT-PCR. Data from these studies indicate that samples from
either the lower respiratory tract or nasopharyngeal aspirates should be tested.
These samples should be complemented with stool specimens after 10 days of

    Table 23.3 Cumulative sensitivity of RT-PCR in different clinical samples
           Study      Nasopharyngeal Other upper           Lower          Stool         Urine      Blood/plasma
                         aspirate    respiratory         respiratory
                        specimens        tract              tract
    Cheng PK et al1 355/789 (45%)         116/489 (24%) 22/29 (76%)     150/540 (28%) 6/198 (3%) 20/89 (23%)
    Chan KH et al2       29/98 (30%)     15/53 (28%)     5/9 (56%)      5/25 (20%)    0/15 (0%)          -
    Tang P et al2                        33/102 (32%)    10/17 (59%)    19/30 (63%)        -       2/81 (2%)
    Drosten C et al 18                   11/19 (58%)     12/12 (100%)   20/23 (87%)        -       3/7 (43%)
    Zhai J et al3            -           11/76 (15%)     113/180 (63%) 60/326 (18%)        -       96/426 (23%)
    Poon LL et al19      43/98 (44%)              -          -          22/37 (59%)        -             -
    Wu HS et al13            -           145/207 (52%)       -              -              -             -
    Cumulative           427/985 (43%)   287/825 (35%)
                                 758/1931 (39%)          162/247 (66%) 276/981 (28%) 6/213 (3%) 121/603 (20%)

a
    Clinical samples from 86 SARS patients, confirmed by seroconversion
Source: Yam WC et al. Evaluation of reverse transcription-PCR assays for rapid diagnosis of severe acute
respiratory syndrome associated with a novel coronavirus. Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 2003, 41:4521–4524.




                                                                                                   SARS: How a global
                                                                                                  epidemic was stopped   221
             disease. An initially negative result should be confirmed by a second testing
             after two to three days. However, negative RT-PCR results will not rule out
             SARS in suspected patients because of the tests’ general lack of clinical sensitivity.
                 Immunoassays. These ‘bedside’ methods are used to detect viruses; however,
             data on their effectiveness for detecting SARS are limited. The reportedly low
             amount of virus particles in early respiratory specimens will make a sensitive
             antigen test for these samples a difficult goal to achieve.19 For serum, an antigen
             assay targeted at secreted nucleocapsid protein has been evaluated on 85 patients
             sampled from the first to the fifth day after the onset of symptoms. Sensitivity
             was high at 94%,26 suggesting that this test could be a real alternative to RT-PCR
             in the early phase of disease. However, the same authors using the same test
             found in a different clinical cohort only 50% sensitivity on the third to the fifth
             day, and 71% on the sixth to the tenth day.27 This is below the sensitivity of RT-
             PCR. Thus, the method must be evaluated further before it can be recommended
             as a standard procedure to complement RT-PCR.


             SUMMARY
                Several test methods are available that are fairly reliable in detecting
             antibodies to the virus or the virus itself. Each method has advantages and
             limitations. IFA is the method of choice for testing for antibody, but EIA has
             some advantages in terms of cost, requirements, and safety. RT-PCR is generally
             used for detecting virus. Unfortunately, there is no test that is reliably positive
             early in the course of SARS, when the result is needed for public-health actions
             to prevent spread.


             REFERENCES
             1
                 Peiris JS et al. Coronavirus as a possible cause of severe acute respiratory
                 syndrome. Lancet, 2003, 361:1319–1325.
             2
                 Chan KH et al. Detection of SARS coronavirus in patients with suspected
                 SARS. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10:294–299.
             3
                 Peiris, JS et al. Clinical progression and viral load in a community outbreak of
                 coronavirus-associated SARS pneumonia: a prospective study. Lancet, 2003,
                 361:1767–1772.
             4
                 Hsueh PR et al. Microbiologic characteristics, serologic responses, and clinical
                 manifestations in severe acute respiratory syndrome, Taiwan. Emerging
                 Infectious Diseases, 2003, 9:1163–1167.
             5
                 Li G, Chen X, Xu A. Profile of specific antibodies to the SARS-associated
                 coronavirus. New England Journal of Medicine, 2003, 349:508–509.
             6
                 Woo PC et al. Detection of specific antibodies to severe acute respiratory
                 syndrome (SARS) coronavirus nucleocapsid protein for serodiagnosis of SARS
                 coronavirus pneumonia. Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 2004, 42:2306–
                 2309.

      SARS: How a global
222   epidemic was stopped
7
   Timani KA et al. Cloning, sequencing, expression, and purification of SARS-
   associated coronavirus nucleocapsid protein for serodiagnosis of SARS. Journal
   of Clinical Virology, 2004, 30:309–312.
8
   Guan M et al. Recombinant protein-based enzyme-linked immunosorbent
   assay and immunochromatographic tests for detection of immunoglobulin G
   antibodies to severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus in SARS
   patients. Clinical and Diagnostic Laboratory Immunology, 2004, 11:287–91.
9
   Hsueh PR et al. SARS antibody test for serosurveillance. Emerging Infectious
   Diseases, 2004, 10:1558–562.
10
   Chen W et al. Antibody response and viraemia during the course of severe
   acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)-associated coronavirus infection. Journal
   of Medical Microbiology, 2004, 53:435–438.
11
   He Q et al. Development of a Western blot assay for detection of antibodies
   against coronavirus causing severe acute respiratory syndrome. Clinical and
   Diagnostic Laboratory Immunology, 2004, 11:417–422.
12
   Wang YD et al. Detection of antibodies against SARS-CoV in serum from
   SARS-infected donors with ELISA and Western blot. Clinical Immunology, 2004,
   113:145–150.
13
   Wu HS et al. Serologic and molecular biologic methods for SARS-associated
   coronavirus infection, Taiwan. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10:304–
   310.
14
   Nie Y et al. Neutralizing antibodies in patients with severe acute respiratory
   syndrome-associated coronavirus infection. Journal of Infectious Diseases,
   2004, 190:1119–1126.
15
   Drosten C et al. Identification of a novel coronavirus in patients with severe
   acute respiratory syndrome. New England Journal of Medicine, 2003,
   348:1967–1976.
16
   Ksiazek TG et al. A novel coronavirus associated with severe acute respiratory
   syndrome. New England Journal of Medicine, 2003, 348:1953–1966.
17
   Yam WC et al. Evaluation of reverse transcription-PCR assays for rapid diagnosis
   of severe acute respiratory syndrome associated with a novel coronavirus.
   Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 2003, 41:4521–4524.
18
   Drosten C et al. Evaluation of advanced reverse transcription-PCR assays and
   an alternative PCR target region for detection of severe acute respiratory
   syndrome-associated coronavirus. Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 2004, 42
   (in press).
19
   Poon LL et al. Detection of SARS coronavirus in patients with severe acute
   respiratory syndrome by conventional and real-time quantitative reverse
   transcription-PCR assays. Clinical Chemistry, 2004, 50:67–72.
20
   Poon LL et al. Early diagnosis of SARS Coronavirus infection by real time RT-
   PCR. Journal of Clinical Virology, 2003, 28:233–238.



                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   223
             21
                Cheng PK et al. Viral shedding patterns of coronavirus in patients with probable
                severe acute respiratory syndrome. Lancet, 2004, 363:1699–1700.
             22
                Tang P et al. Interpretation of diagnostic laboratory tests for severe acute
                respiratory syndrome: the Toronto experience. Canadian Medical Association
                Journal, 2004, 170:47–54.
             23
                Zhai J et al. Real-time polymerase chain reaction for detecting SARS coronavirus,
                Beijing. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10:300–303.
             24
                Rota PA et al. Characterization of a novel coronavirus associated with severe
                acute respiratory syndrome. Science, 2003, 300:1394–1399.
             25
                Ng EK et al. Quantitative analysis and prognostic implication of SARS
                coronavirus RNA in the plasma and serum of patients with severe acute
                respiratory syndrome. Clinical Chemistry, 2003, 49:1976–80.
             26
                Che XY et al. Nucleocapsid protein as early diagnostic marker for SARS.
                Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10:1947–1949.
             27
                Che XY et al. Sensitive and specific monoclonal antibody-based capture
                enzyme immunoassay for detection of nucleocapsid antigen in sera from
                patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome. Journal of Clinical Microbiology,
                2004, 42:2629–2635.




      SARS: How a global
224   epidemic was stopped
           24 THE ANIMAL
            CONNECTION


   An important source of emerging diseases is the transfer of infectious agents
from animals to humans through changes in ecology, human behaviour,
technology or industry, international travel and commerce, or microbial
characteristics, compounded perhaps by a breakdown in public-health
measures.1
   Since its discovery in 2003, the SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) has been
thought to originate in animals. This chapter summarizes the published studies
that support this hypothesis, and the issues that still have to be addressed to
prevent the re-emergence of SARS.


EPIDEMIOLOGICAL            LINKS
    Evidence of an animal origin for SARS first
came from epidemiological studies of early
cases in Guangdong Province, China. The first
cases or clusters occurred between November
2002 and February 2003 in several
independent geographic areas in the southern
part of the province.2 This suggests multiple
introductions of the virus from a common
source, perhaps a wild animal used for food.
Wild animals are commonly eaten in the Pearl Civet cats, shown here inside a cage at a market in
                                                Guangzhou, may have played a role in the
River Delta region, sometimes to show social emergence of the SARS coronavirus.
status or wealth. Several of the early patients
were chefs or seafood merchants, or had contact in other ways with wildlife
used for food.3 Those who handled, killed, and sold wild animals or who
prepared and served food made up 39% of those who fell ill before the end of
January, but only 2%–10% of cases from February to April.4 The early cases
were also more likely to live within walking distance of a market where live
animals were sold, killed, and butchered, than the later cases.4




                                                                            SARS: How a global
                                                                           epidemic was stopped    225
             SOURCE OF THE         VIRUS
                 Researchers in China have tried to identify the natural reservoir of SARS-
             CoV by screening samples from wildlife and domestic species or from archived
             collections, but most of their findings are unpublished. Samples from six
             Himalayan palm civets, a raccoon dog, and a Chinese ferret badger from a live-
             animal market in Shenzhen showed infection with a SARS-like virus.5 When
             researchers compared this virus with the human SARS-CoV, they found that the
             animal virus genome had a 29-nucleotide sequence not found in the human
             virus genome. But five isolates from patients in the early phase of the outbreak
             retained this 29-nucleotide sequence.6 All of the patients had come into contact
             with some of the earliest independent cases in Guangzhou. These findings add
             compelling evidence to suggest that the virus originated in animals and then
             possibly mutated, becoming more readily transmissible between humans.
                 Four different studies have investigated SARS-CoV antibody levels among
             workers in live-animal markets.5,7,8,9 Workers involved in the trade and slaughter
             of wild animals were consistently found to be at greater risk of having SARS-
             CoV antibodies; between 13% and 40% of them tested positive for the
             antibodies.5,7,8 The proportion of antibody-positive workers was even higher
             among traders of palm civets, at between 59% and 72%.7,8 Interestingly, in all of
             these studies antibody-positive individuals did not report having experienced
             symptoms of SARS.5,7,8,9 These findings suggest either that infections can be
             asymptomatic or that these workers were exposed to a less severe SARS-like
             animal CoV, which might have cross-reacted with the SARS-CoV antibody test.
             The workers may also have acquired immunity from low-level exposure over
             time.


             SARS CORONAVIRUS IN OTHER ANIMALS
                Other groups have studied the effect of SARS-CoV in other species to develop
             animal models or to identify possible hosts for the virus. The first animal model
             developed was the cynomolgus macaque.10 This study helped fulfil Koch’s
             postulates and confirm SARS-CoV as the aetiologic agent of SARS. Ferrets develop
             SARS-like clinical signs and are therefore good alternative models, besides
             primates, for SARS research.11 Domestic poultry and pigs were found to be
             unlikely reservoirs or amplifying hosts, following experimental infections to
             determine their susceptibility to the virus,12,13 although it is not known if prior
             immunity of the pigs to another coronavirus had an effect. Civets,14 golden
             hamsters,15 and mice16 have been shown in recent experiments to be susceptible
             to infection by SARS-CoV and may also be used as animal models for future
             studies.




      SARS: How a global
226   epidemic was stopped
   After the first case of community-acquired SARS in China was identified in
the winter of 2003–2004, findings from studies of animals from live-animal
markets in the late fall of 2003 prompted the cull of about 10,000 palm civets
and several other small mammals.17,18 Dr Guan Yi reported that the viral genomic
sequence obtained from a recently sampled palm civet was identical to that
found in the patient.17 In all, four community-acquired cases of SARS were
identified between December 2003 and January 2004. According to a
presentation on this cluster at the International Conference on Emerging Infectious
Diseases in 2004, the only clear case of exposure to a palm civet was a waitress
who worked in a restaurant that had the animals in a cage, with evidence of
SARS-CoV, in front of the shop.19


ISSUES    TO BE RESOLVED
    While a growing body of evidence suggests
that palm civets may have been involved in
the spread of SARS-CoV, many questions
persist regarding which other animals may
have contributed to its spread, and which
animals could serve as the reservoir host. For
example, rats may have been a source or
vector of the SARS virus in the outbreak in
Amoy Gardens, Hong Kong (China) in 2003.20
This theory has been largely discounted, but A poster promotes the killing of civet cats,
it remains a possibility. The studies of civet cockroaches, and rats at the Xinyuan live-animal
cats in markets may not be representative of market in Guangzhou, 14 January 2004.
infection in other places, as seroprevalence has been found to differ markedly
between civet cats in the market and those on the farm.21
    A diagnostic test to screen animals for the virus or antibodies urgently needs
to be developed and validated to help track the movements of the virus. The
factors that influenced the emergence of the SARS-CoV in the winter of 2003
must also be investigated. As noted above, several studies into the origin of
SARS have been done or are under way in China, but much of the data remains
unpublished.
    A research framework has been developed by WHO in collaboration with
colleagues from the Government of China, but it needs to be fully implemented.
The origin and ecology of the SARS virus must be understood before appropriate
preventive measures can be developed.




                                                                           SARS: How a global
                                                                          epidemic was stopped    227
             SUMMARY
                Epidemiological, virological, and serological studies suggest that the palm
             civet in southern China may have played a role in the emergence of the SARS-
             CoV, but many questions remain unanswered. The close relationship between
             these animals and humans seems to have been a likely precondition. Appropriate
             preventive measures can be developed only with a clear understanding of the
             origin and ecology of the SARS-CoV. The scientific community must therefore
             continue to collaborate toward a better understanding of the chain of transmission
             to avoid future pandemics.


             REFERENCES
             1
                Morse SS. Factors in the emergence of infectious diseases. Emerging Infectious
                Diseases, 1995, 1(1):7–15.
             2
                Zhong NS et al. Epidemiology and cause of severe acute respiratory syndrome
                (SARS) in Guangdong, People’s Republic of China, in February 2003. Lancet,
                2003, 362:1353–1358.
             3
                He JF et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome in Guandong Province of China:
                epidemiology and control measures. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi, 2003,
                37(4):227–232.
             4
                Xu R-H et al. Epidemiologic clues to SARS origin in China. Emerging Infectious
                Diseases, 2004, 10(6):1030–1037.
             5
                Guan Y et al. Isolation and characterization of viruses related to the SARS
                coronavirus from animals in Southern China. Science, 2003, 203:276–278.
             6
                The Chinese SARS Molecular Epidemiology Consortium. Molecular evolution
                of the SARS coronavirus during the course of the SARS epidemic in China.
                Science, 2004, 303:1666–1669.
             7
                Xu HF et al. An epidemiologic investigation on infection with severe acute
                respiratory syndrome coronavirus in wild animal traders in Guangzhou.
                Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi, 2004, 38(2):81–83.
             8
                Yu D et al. Prevalence of IgG antibody to SARS-associated coronavirus in
                animal traders, Guangdong Province, China, 2003. Morbidity Mortality Weekly
                Report, 2003, 52(41):986–987.
             9
                Wang M et al. Analysis of the risk factors of severe acute respiratory symdrome
                coronavirus infection in workers from animal markets. Zhonghua Liu Xing
                Bing Xue Za Zhi, 2004, 25(6):503–505.
             10
                Fouchier RAM et al. Koch’s postulates fulfilled for SARS virus. Nature, 2003,
                423:240.
             11
                Martina BEE et al. SARS virus infection of cats and ferrets. Nature, 2003,
                425:915.
             12
                Swayne DE et al. Domestic poultry and SARS coronavirus, China. Emerging
                Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10(5):914–916.


      SARS: How a global
228   epidemic was stopped
13
   Weingartl HM et al. Susceptibility of pigs and chickens to SARS coronavirus.
   Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2004, 10(2):179–184.
14
   Wu D et al. Civets are equally susceptible to experimental infection by two
   different severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus isolates. Journal of
   Virology, 2005, 79:2620–2625.
15
   Roberts A et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection of
   golden Syrian hamsters. Journal of Virology, 2005, 79:505–511.
16
   Subbarao KJ et al. Prior infection and passive transfer of neutralizing antibody
   prevent replication of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus in the
   respiratory tract of mice. Journal of Virology, 2004, 78:3572–3577.
17
   Normile D. Viral DNA match spurs China’s civet roundup. Science, 2004,
   303:292.
18
   Greenfeld KT. The inside story of one scientist’s crusade to link SARS to civets.
   Will it avert an epidemic? Time, 19 January 2004, 26–28.
19
   Liang G, Xu RH. SARS in Guangdong: 2004. Late breaker presented on 1
   March 2004 at the International Conference on Emerging Infectious Diseases
   2004 in Atlanta, GA, USA.
20
   Ng SKC. Possible role of an animal vector in the SARS outbreak at Amoy
   Gardens. Lancet, 2003, 362:570–572.
21
   Tu C et al. Antibodies to SARS-Coronavirus in civets. Emerging Infectious
   Diseases, 2004, 10:2244–2248.




                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                       epidemic was stopped   229
                     25 sars VACCINE
                      DEVELOPMENT


                  As emphasized in a resolution of the World Health Assembly in May 2003,1
             a safe, highly effective and affordable SARS vaccine would be an invaluable
             complement to other containment or therapeutic measures to prevent a future
             epidemic.
                  Several countries have made the development of SARS vaccines a high
             priority, and will soon evaluate how safe and immunogenic the most advanced
             candidate vaccines are in humans. However, several key scientific questions
             still need to be answered. These relate notably to the need to generate data on:
             the genetic diversity and evolution of the SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV); the
             nature of protective immune responses (including the potential for antibodies
             to worsen disease); and the natural history of the disease. In addition, current
             animal models need to be standardized to provide more reliable results on the
             efficacy of candidate vaccines, specific regulatory and licensing issues need to
             be dealt with, and strategies should be thought out for the deployment of future
             SARS vaccines.2
                  This chapter provides a brief overview of the challenges to the development
             of a SARS vaccine.


             GENETIC DIVERSITY AND EVOLUTION
                 If it is like other coronaviruses, SARS-CoV is prone to genetic variations
             through frequent mutations and can diversify and continuously evolve through
             RNA recombination. 3 With some coronavirus infections, selected escape
             mutations appearing under immune pressure can result in major shifts in
             pathogenicity and tissue specificity. Most SARS-CoV isolates from the 2002–
             2003 outbreak are largely conserved, but some recent results suggest that more
             genetically diverse strains of SARS-CoV do exist and can cause a SARS-like
             illness. In addition, genetically diverse SARS-CoV could emerge as a result of
             cross-species transmission of SARS-like viruses from wild animals. Genetic and
             biological changes in the SARS-CoV might pose a problem for the development
             of broadly protective SARS vaccines. It is therefore important to continue
             monitoring variations in the virus to ensure that candidate vaccines will protect
             against all SARS-CoV strains.4

      SARS: How a global
230   epidemic was stopped
RELIABLE     ANIMAL MODELS
    Reliable animal models will be essential to the development and preclinical
evaluation of candidate SARS vaccines. Extensive research being done in this
area shows that various animal species, including mice, cats, ferrets, civet cats,
pigs, hamsters, chickens, as well as nonhuman primates (Macaca fascicularis,
Macaca mulata), can be infected with the SARS-CoV. Each of these animal models
can vary significantly in levels of viral replication, demonstrated pathological
events and clinical evidence of illness. However, none of the animal models
tested to date has been able to reproduce the development of the severe disease
observed in humans.
    In addition, there is an urgent need to further standardize these animal
models, to allow for a more robust evaluation of both the safety and the efficacy
of SARS candidate vaccines. Likewise, well-characterized reagents should be
developed and made widely available for challenge experiments to facilitate a
comparison of results obtained by different groups.5


CORRELATES OF PROTECTION
    To accelerate vaccine development, the correlates of immune protection
should be known; this is not the case with SARS. The results of animal
experiments suggest that a neutralizing humoral response can protect against
infection by the SARS-CoV, but it is likely that both humoral and cellular immune
responses would help protect against disease progression or virus transmission.
There is some preliminary evidence that the viral S protein could be one of the
targets for neutralizing antibodies, while cellular immune responses could be
induced by the viral nucleoprotein. However, further research is needed to
determine the role of different immune mechanisms of protection against SARS.
The experience with cat coronavirus vaccines highlights the need to be aware
of potential immune-mediated enhancement of susceptibility to infection or
disease in vaccines (immunopathogenesis), which poses an additional challenge
for safety monitoring with various candidate vaccines.6
    In the absence of definitive information on correlates of immune protection,
different vaccination strategies are being developed in parallel to stimulate
different effectors of immunity at either the systemic or the mucosal level. Among
the vaccines being explored are nonreplicating immunogens (whole-inactivated
virus and subunit recombinant vaccines) and candidate vaccines that can induce
cellular immunity (live attenuated, vectored, and DNA vaccines). Both types of
vaccines could also be used in different “prime-boost” combinations to induce
broadly reactive immune responses. The front-line SARS vaccine research has
focused on the development of whole-inactivated candidate vaccines. Several
of these have reached advanced stages of preclinical development and are being
considered for testing in human clinical trials (by Sinovac, China; Aventis Pasteur,


                                                                         SARS: How a global
                                                                        epidemic was stopped   231
             France; Baxter Healthcare, Austria; Chiron, Italy; and several others). Other
             candidate vaccines based on novel technologies like recombinant candidate
             proteins, plasmid DNA, and viral-vectored vaccines are also being
             developed.7,8,9,10


             REGULATORY         ASPECTS
                 From a regulatory point of view, all these vaccine candidates must meet the
             required standards for good manufacturing practice (GMP) production, to ensure
             safe and high-quality products. The scientific and ethical review of protocols
             and the conduct of clinical trials in humans will need special consideration.
             Finally, a major hurdle on the pathway to a licensed SARS vaccine might be the
             difficulty or even impossibility of studying vaccine efficacy in humans. Indeed,
             with SARS cases currently absent, vaccine efficacy cannot be assessed. On the
             other hand, should the virus re-emerge on a scale to allow such assessment, this
             might have to be made under the pressure of an emergency epidemic situation,
             perhaps greatly complicating the conduct of efficacy trials. The national
             regulatory authorities of countries wishing to license a SARS vaccine will therefore
             need to establish the bases on which they will make decisions about surrogates
             of efficacy in humans for future products submitted for their approval.


             SUMMARY
                 There are several important challenges to the development of a safe and
             effective SARS vaccine. All these challenges will need to be addressed through
             intensive and close international collaboration.


             REFERENCES
             1
                 Resolution WHA56.29. Severe acute respiratory syndrome. Geneva, World
                 Health Organization, 2003.
             2
                 Kieny M-P, Esparza J. SARS and the public good. SCRIPS Magazine, 2003,
                 June:26–27.
             3
                 Domingo et al. Molecular Basis of Virus Evolution. Cambridge, University Press,
                 1995, 181–191.
             4
                 WHO Expert Group Consultation on “Needs and Opportunities for SARS
                 Vaccine Research and Development”, 31 October – 1 November 2003.
                 Geneva, World Health Organization (http://www.who.int/vaccine_research/
                 , accessed 1 April 2005).
             5
                 Report of the WHO Consultation on “SARS Animal Models”, 5–6 February
                 2004, Rotterdam. Vaccine, 2004 (in press).
             6
                 Corapi WV, Olsen CW, Scott FW. Monoclonal antibody analysis of
                 neutralization and antibody-dependent enhancement of feline infectious



      SARS: How a global
232   epidemic was stopped
   peritonitis virus. Journal of Virology, 1992, 66:6695–6705.
7
   Cavanagh D. Severe acute respiratory syndrome vaccine development:
   experiences of vaccination against avian infectious bronchitis coronavirus.
   Avian Pathology, 2003, 32:567–582.
8
   Marshall E, Enserink M. Caution Urged on SARS Vaccines. Science, 2004,
   303:944–946.
9
   Yang ZY et al. A DNA vaccine induses SARS coronavirus neutralization and
   protective immunity in mice. Nature, 2004, 428:561–564.
10
   Choy WY et al. Synthetic peptide studies on the severe acute respiratory
   syndrome (SARS) coronavirus spike glycoprotein: Perspective for SARS vaccine
   development. Clinical Chemistry, 2004, 50 (in press).




                                                                    SARS: How a global
                                                                   epidemic was stopped   233
                  26 BIOSAFETY AND
                  BIOCONTAINMENT
                        ISSUES


                 Following the identification of SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV), a novel and
             previously unrecognized human pathogen causing significant mortality, concerns
             began to be raised about the safe handling of clinical specimens associated with
             SARS, as well as about safety issues related to culturing the virus, to avoid
             laboratory-acquired infections. In response to these concerns, the World Health
             Organization (WHO) developed biosafety guidelines for the handling of SARS
             specimens in April 2003.1
                 The guidelines recommended that any activities that required virus culture
             or manipulations involving the growth or concentration of the virus should be
             carried out in biosafety level 3 (BSL3) facilities, and routine diagnostic procedures
             (such as testing of serum and blood samples for serology, clinical chemistry, and
             haematology, or manipulations involving neutralised or inactivated virus) should
             be conducted under BSL2. Any procedure that could generate an aerosol should
             be performed in a class 2 biological safety cabinet within a BSL3 laboratory,
             and the operator should wear protective equipment, including disposable gloves,
             solid-front or wrap-around gowns with cuffed sleeves, eye protection, and a
             surgical mask. If a procedure was performed outside a biological safety cabinet,
             it should only be done in a BSL3 laboratory and a full-face shield should be
             used.
                 No case of laboratory-acquired infection was reported during the outbreak.


             BIOSAFETY IN       THE POST-OUTBREAK PERIOD
                Once the SARS outbreak was over in early July 2003, and human transmission
             had ceased, biocontainment of SARS-CoV became increasingly important. The
             only known sources of SARS-CoV, other than wildlife, were diagnostic or research
             laboratories. It was suspected that many clinical specimens might have been
             stored in diagnostic pathology laboratories, especially in countries that had had
             SARS cases, and stored under inappropriate containment conditions. The risks



      SARS: How a global
234   epidemic was stopped
were possibly greater for clinical specimens sent to nonmicrobiological
laboratories, such as haematology, clinical chemistry, and pathology laboratories.
In addition, strains of SARS-CoV had been distributed to many research
laboratories around the world, and in many instances there was no record of
which laboratories had received the virus, or whether they had in turn passed
the virus on to other laboratories. Thus, there was a growing unease that
accidental laboratory-acquired infections might give rise to renewed epidemic
activity.
   These concerns appeared to be realized in September 2003 when a laboratory-
acquired case of SARS was confirmed in Singapore in a 27-year-old research
worker. The patient had been working on West Nile virus in a laboratory that
had also been doing research on SARS-CoV. Fortunately, the case was relatively
mild and did not give rise to secondary infections.2,3 An international investigation
into the case concluded that cross-contamination of West Nile virus samples
with the SARS-CoV in the laboratory was the source of the infection, and both
viruses were detected in a research specimen. How this accidental laboratory
contamination occurred is not known. The investigation identified several
inappropriate laboratory practices, and made a series of recommendations for
their correction. 3 There was also some concern about whether the BSL3
laboratory in which the infection occurred complied with internationally
accepted standards, such as those published by WHO,4 or from the United
States of America.5 This event showed the need to train all workers employed at
the BSL3 level, and the importance of facilities meeting accepted international
biocontainment/biosafety standards.
   Laboratory biosafety was a major topic of discussion at an informal SARS
Laboratory Workshop in Geneva in October 2003.6 The participants discussed
a number of biosafety issues, including the biocontainment level for culturing
SARS-CoV; working with the live virus; storing SARS-CoV cultures and clinical
specimens; and the need for national inventories of SARS-CoV and for national
certification of laboratories working with the virus.
   The participants endorsed the WHO biosafety guidelines with respect to
biosafety levels for culturing the virus (BSL3) and for diagnostic activities (BSL2,
using BSL3 work practices). They recommended that SARS-CoV cultures be
stored at least at BSL3, and that clinical specimens known or suspected to contain
SARS-CoV be stored preferably at BSL3, or at a minimum in a locked freezer in
a BSL2 facility. It was also recommended that national governments keep an
inventory of laboratories working with or storing SARS-CoV, including clinical
specimens.
   The workshop’s deliberations and recommendations were used in developing
the post-outbreak biosafety guidelines for handling SARS-CoV specimens and
cultures.7




                                                                         SARS: How a global
                                                                        epidemic was stopped   235
             LABORATORY-ACQUIRED INFECTIONS IN CHINA
                  A second laboratory-acquired infection with SARS-CoV occurred in Taipei
             in December 2003. A senior research worker became infected while attempting
             to decontaminate a safety cabinet in a BSL4 facility at the Institute of Preventative
             Medicine, National Defence University.8 An international investigation concluded
             that poor laboratory practice was at fault. There was no further transmission.
             Once again, the need for good training in laboratory practice, at the BSL3/BSL4
             levels, was brought out.
                  A third and potentially more serious event occurred between February and
             May 2004. The index case in the outbreak was a 26-year-old postgraduate
             medical student from Anhui Medical University who was working at the National
             Institute of Virology of China’s Centre for Disease Control Beijing. She became
             ill in late March and transmitted the infection to seven others, one of whom, her
             mother, later died. A second postgraduate student working in the same laboratory
             also became infected but did not transmit the virus to anyone else. Thus, between
             late March and late April, there were nine cases of SARS, one death, and three
             generations of transmission.9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16
                  Subsequent investigations of staff working at the National Institute of Virology
             revealed two other cases of infection in February resulting in SARS-like illnesses
             among workers in the same laboratory.17 The main cause of the outbreak was
             the transfer of an incompletely inactivated culture of SARS-CoV from the BSL3
             laboratory into the laboratory where the infections had occurred.17 There was
             also an additional concern that instances of SARS-like disease had occurred in
             laboratory workers and in hospitalized patients with a history of working in a
             facility in which SARS-CoV was being cultured, yet none of these individuals
             were tested for SARS-CoV infection until mid April 2004, three weeks after
             symptoms first occurred. Furthermore there was no monitoring of the health of
             staff in the Institute of Virology.
                  The lessons learnt from this outbreak included the need to ensure training of
             laboratory workers at the requisite biosafety levels, the need for good and safe
             laboratory practices, the need for monitoring the health of all research workers
             using cultures of live SARS-CoV or in contact with those so doing, and the
             importance of taking a proper patient history at the time of admission to hospital.


             BIOSAFETY AND BIOCONTAINMENT OF SARS CORONAVIRUS
                A new epidemic of SARS would most likely emerge from an animal reservoir
             or a laboratory doing research with live cultures of SARS-CoV or handling stored
             clinical specimens containing SARS-CoV. The risk of re-emergence from a
             laboratory source is thought to be potentially greater.18,19 For this reason, WHO
             provided guidelines for the handling, packing, and shipping of SARS-CoV or
             specimens containing SARS-CoV, and clearly indicated the laboratory practices


      SARS: How a global
236   epidemic was stopped
that required BSL3 facilities and those that could be done under BSL2 conditions.1,7
The laboratory-acquired infections in Singapore, Taipei, and Beijing indicate
that these guidelines have not been strictly followed and reaffirm the importance
of strong national monitoring of their implementation.20 In addition, WHO has
recently published an extensively revised and expanded third edition of its
Laboratory Biosafety Manual,4 which significantly extends and supports the
guidelines.
    However, concerns have been raised about the current levels of containment
and the lack of consistency found in different national biocontainment/biosafety
manuals. Varying requirements are evident between guidelines for BSL3
laboratories for human and animal pathogens in the United States of America,
and between the guidelines set out by the United States, the United Kingdom,
Australia, Europe, Canada, and WHO. Many of the guidelines do not provide
sufficient protection, such as against possible aerosol transmission in the event
of an accidental breakage outside a biosafety cabinet within BSL3 containment.
To circumvent these possible scenarios, a “BSL3 plus” standard is urgently needed
to provide greater operator protection through personal air pressure respirators,
negative pressure environment, HEPA filtration of exhaust air, and showers. To
maintain strict biocontainment, it may also be necessary to chemically treat
waste. To ensure conformity and the guideline enforcement, the International
Organization for Standardization should develop a set of international standards
for laboratory design, maintenance, and operator training at the different
biosafety levels.
    There are a number of crucial lessons from the SARS outbreak and from the
subsequent laboratory-acquired infections with respect to biosafety and
biocontainment.
    • Personnel working in BSL2, BSL3 and BSL4 laboratories should be
properly trained. No research staff should be permitted to work with agents
under these conditions unless they have been fully trained and understand the
work practices essential to these levels of biosafety, including the use of personal
protective equipment.
    • National biosafety levels for laboratories must, at a minimum, meet the
standards required in the WHO Laboratory Biosafety Manual, 3rd ed.4 An
international agreement should be sought to develop standards for the building
and maintenance of biologically secure laboratories, based on the currently
accepted biosafety levels with additional safeguards to protect against accidental
spillages, preferably through an independent organization such as the
International Organization for Standardization.
    • The health of all those working with SARS-CoV and others who may be
in contact with them must be monitored so that laboratory infections can be
detected at an early stage.




                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                       epidemic was stopped   237
                 • BSL2, BSL3, and BSL4 facilities must be regularly maintained so they
             continue to operate effectively.
                 • Laboratory workers must strictly adhere to the WHO guidelines when
             working with live cultures of SARS-CoV or with animals infected with live SARS-
             CoV.
                 In addition to these lessons, WHO strongly encourages countries to undertake
             an inventory of laboratories holding SARS-CoV or clinical samples or material
             potentially containing SARS-CoV. These clinical samples and other infective
             materials must be stored appropriately and all work with these materials must
             be done at the correct containment level. The intention is not to restrict
             laboratories from working with SARS-CoV; indeed, the more work that is done,
             the greater our knowledge about this novel virus. Rather, it is hoped that a
             detailed up-to-date inventory will make a laboratory accident or escape of virus
             less likely. Countries are also urged to set national guidelines and standards for
             biosafety and biocontainment based on those described by WHO.4
                 Finally, it is important to emphasize the basic components of laboratory
             biosafety that ensure a safe workplace: facility design; laboratory practices; safety
             equipment; and medical surveillance. Each aspect must be addressed, especially
             medical surveillance, which is often overlooked.21


             SUMMARY
                Laboratory-acquired SARS infections, which were a theoretical concern
             during the outbreak, have become an actual risk in the post-outbreak period.
             Biocontainment and biosafety issues need to be properly addressed to ensure
             that SARS does not re-emerge from a laboratory-acquired infection. All countries
             should develop their own national guidelines for biosafety and biocontainment,
             compliant with those described in the Laboratory Biosafety Manual, 3rd ed., so
             that SARS-CoV and other dangerous pathogens remain contained. The lack of
             consistency in the national biocontainment and biosafety guidelines for design,
             building, maintenance, and operator training of BSL 1-4 laboratories needs to
             be addressed, and more stringent guidelines should be developed through the
             International Organization for Standardization.




      SARS: How a global
238   epidemic was stopped
REFERENCES
1
   Biosafety guidelines for handling of SARS specimens. Geneva, World Health
   Organization,       25    April     2003     (http://www.who.int/csr/sars/
   biosafety2003_04_25/en/, accessed 1 April 2005).
2
   Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in Singapore: an update. Geneva,
   World Health Organization, 16 September 2003 (http://www.who.int/csr/don/
   2003_09_16/en/, accessed 1 April 2005)
3
   Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in Singapore, update 2. Geneva,
   World Health Organization, 24 September 2003 (http://www.who.int/csr/don/
   2003_09_24/en/, accessed 1 April 2005).
4
   Laboratory Biosafety Manual, 3rd ed. Geneva, World Health Organization
   2004.
5
    Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and National Institutes of
   Health (NIH). Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories, 4th
   ed., Washington, DC, US Government Printing Office, 1999.
6
   Summary of the discussion and recommendations of the SARS Laboratory
   Workshop. Geneva, World Health Organization, 22 October 2003 (http://
   www.who.int/csr/sars/guidelines/en/SARSLabmeeting.pdf, accessed 1 April
   2005).
7
   WHO post-outbreak biosafety guidelines for handling of SARS-CoV specimens
   and cultures. Geneva, World Health Organization, 18 December 2003 (http:/
   /www.who.int/csr/sars/biosafety2003_12_18/en/, accessed 1 April 2005).
8
   Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in Taiwan, China. Geneva, World
   Health Organization, 17 December 2003 (http://www.who.int/csr/don/
   2003_12_17/en/, accessed 1 April 2005).
9
   SARS: one suspected case reported in China. Geneva, World Health
   Organization, 22 April 2004 (http://www.who.int/csr/don/2004_04_22/en/,
   accessed 1 April 2005).
10
   China reports additional SARS cases, update. Geneva, World Health
   Organization, 23 April 2004 (http://www.who.int/csr/don/2004_04_23/en/,
   accessed 1 April 2005).
11
   Additional patients in China under investigation for SARS: WHO team travels
   to Beijing, update 2. Geneva, World Health Organization, 26 April 2004.
   (http://www.who.int/csr/don/2004_04_26/en/, accessed 1 April 2005).
12
   China reports additional SARS case, update 3. Geneva, World Health
   Organization, 28 April 2004 (http://www.who.int/csr/don/2004_04_28/en/,
   accessed 1 April 2005).
13
   China confirms SARS infection in two previously reported cases, update 4.
   Geneva, World Health Organization, 29 April 2004 (http://www.who.int/csr/
   don/2004_04_29/en/, accessed 1 April 2005).




                                                                    SARS: How a global
                                                                   epidemic was stopped   239
             14
                China confirms SARS infection in another previously reported case: summary
                of cases to date, update 5. Geneva, World Health Organization, 30 April
                2004 (http://www.who.int/csr/don/2004_04_30/en/, accessed 1 April 2005).
             15
                SARS in China: investigation continues, update 6. Geneva, World Health
                Organization, 5 May 2004 (http://www.who.int/csr/don/2004_05_05/en/,
                accessed 1 April 2005)
             16
                China’s latest SARS outbreak has been contained, but biosafety concerns
                remain, update 7. Geneva, World Health Organization, 18 May 2004 (http:/
                /www.who.int/csr/don/2004_05_18a/en/, accessed 1 April 2005).
             17
                Investigation into China’s recent SARS outbreak yields important lessons for
                global public health. Manila, World Health Organization, 2 July 2004 (http://
                www.wpro.who.int/sars/docs/update/update_07022004.asp, accessed 1 April
                2005).
             18
                Mackenzie JS et al. The WHO response to SARS and preparations for the
                future. In: Knobler S et al., eds. Learning from SARS: preparing for the next
                disease outbreak, Washington, DC, The Institute of Medicine National Academy
                Press, 2004:42–50.
             19
                Olowokure B et al. The laboratory containment of dangerous pathogens: the
                lessons learnt from severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) [submitted for
                publication].
             20
                Heymann, DL, Aylward RB, Wolff C. Dangerous pathogens in the laboratory:
                from smallpox to today’s SARS setbacks and tomorrow’s polio-free world.
                Lancet, 2004, 363:1566–1568.
             21
                Keeping the ‘Genome’ in the Bottle: Reinforcing Biosafety Level 3 Procedures.
                Atlanta, GA, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Public Health Training
                Network Webcast, 17 June 2004 (http://www.phppo.cdc.gov/PHTN/bsl3/,
                accessed on 1 April 2005).




      SARS: How a global
240   epidemic was stopped
PART V: THE FUTURE




                SARS: How a global
               epidemic was stopped   241
      SARS: How a global
242   epidemic was stopped
     27 WHAT DID WE
    LEARN FROM SARS?


    “History teaches us that men and nations behave wisely once they have
                     exhausted all other alternatives.”
         - Abba Eban, Israeli Minister of Foreign Affairs, 1966–1974


   With the SARS virus contained, we can now look back at the 2003 global
epidemic through the rosy spectacles of hindsight and congratulate ourselves
on a major public-health success. Self-congratulation, however, is unbecoming,
and often based on selective memory. But the nations affected by SARS certainly
deserve recognition for their efforts to control a frightening and obstinate new
disease. Their international partners can, in general, be proud of the way they
worked together with the affected countries. The efforts recalled here deserve
to be remembered and recorded, either because they were effective and led to
the end of the outbreaks or because they were ineffective or inefficient. We
recall as well some of the administrative, organizational, and institutional factors
that may have helped or hindered the success of the control operations.


LESSON 1: WE        WERE LUCKY THIS TIME
   The SARS virus could have become a constant threat to human health in the
world we live in. It did not. Thanks to the intense and skilful efforts of the
governments of all affected areas, together with their regional and international
partners, the virus was contained.
   Certain characteristics of the SARS virus made containment possible. Infected
individuals usually did not transmit the virus until several days after symptoms
began and were most infectious only by the tenth day or so of illness, when they
develop severe symptoms. Therefore, effective isolation of patients was enough
to control spread. If cases were infectious before symptoms appeared, or if
asymptomatic cases transmitted the virus, the disease would have been much
more difficult, perhaps even impossible, to control.
   The chains of transmission could be broken at various points. The incubation
period was relatively long (two to 10 days, with a median of five days), giving
more time for contacts to be traced and isolated before they fell ill and became

                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                       epidemic was stopped   243
             infectious themselves. The incubation period also dictated how long contacts
             had to be supervised. If the incubation period were longer, observation or
             quarantine would have been much more difficult to manage.
                 SARS being largely an urban disease, concentrated in relatively well-equipped
             hospitals, it was easier to detect cases and trace contacts, isolate patients, limit
             infection, and therefore control the spread of the disease. Reporting was also
             more reliable.
                 Still, many questions remain. Why did the outbreaks stop so abruptly in Viet
             Nam after such an explosive start? There is no doubt that the strict application
             of infection-control measures was critical, but they were far from perfect. In
             particular, several patients were transferred from the Hanoi-French Hospital to
             Bac Mai Hospital at a stage of their illness when transmission should have been
             very likely. But despite the potentially serious lapses, there were no new cases.
             Apparently many SARS cases were simply not very infectious.
                 Why did the Philippines not have a huge epidemic? Certainly, case
             investigation was done well, and contract tracing was exemplary, thanks to the
             energy of the Secretary of Health and to the expert work of the field
             epidemiologists. But, again, things were not perfect. Isolation of patients and
             contacts was less than ideal. And thousands of overseas workers returned to
             celebrate the Holy Week before Easter from Hong Kong (China) and other
             countries where the virus was still spreading. Only one from Canada brought
             the infection back with them.
                 Using the research data that have accumulated since the human epidemics
             stopped, the epidemiology of those situations and others like them should be
             re-examined. There are certainly better explanations than “good luck”. There is
             certainly still much that we do not understand about this disease.


             LESSON 2: TRANSPARENCY              IS THE BEST POLICY
                 In this globalized age, the world community expects accurate, complete,
             and timely information about diseases that do not respect international borders.
             Within countries, as modern communications technology makes people better
             informed and more sophisticated, they expect their governments to provide
             transparent, up-to-date information about communicable diseases that may
             threaten their communities. Governments will be held accountable, both
             internationally and nationally, for failures in conveying straightforward, reliable
             information.
                 Some of the affected countries did not acknowledge openly and squarely
             the presence of SARS, downplayed its extent, and attempted to prove that it was
             something else. Delays in acknowledging the presence of the disease contributed
             to a general mistrust of public health information. In China, for example, the
             severe respiratory infection eventually known as SARS was allowed to spread
             unreported in the southern province of Guangdong for at least three months,


      SARS: How a global
244   epidemic was stopped
from November 2002, before its existence was even acknowledged. When the
disease broke out in Guangzhou City, hospitals were caught unprepared, as
others were in subsequent outbreaks in Beijing, Inner Mongolia and Shanxi.
Inadequate infection-control measures amplified the outbreak, which eventually
spread to Hong Kong, where the international airport is one of the busiest in the
world. Hong Kong’s hospitals were infected, and the disease was carried by
travellers to Toronto, Singapore, Hanoi, and eventually around the world.
    As local medical and public-health staff battled heroically with the virus,
they learnt important lessons about its epidemiology and infectivity, occupational
risk factors, and infection control in hospitals. If shared earlier, these lessons
would have been invaluable to other countries as the virus reached their shores.


LESSON 3: PUBLIC          HEALTH IS A SERIOUS BUSINESS
    In a globalized world, where people and products travel vast distances
virtually in an instant, threats to health, whether real or imagined, can be
economically disastrous. The economic devastation wreaked by SARS is well
documented. Billions of dollars were lost by countries ill prepared for such
losses, particularly in the tourism, hospitality, and transport industries. A clearly
reasoned, well-planned, and effectively managed and publicized response to
such threats is important in mitigating the damage to the economy, and to
public confidence in government.
    Here Singapore set a very positive example. When the epidemic emerged in
this island state, the Government had to make difficult policy decisions. Would
its officials be content with hoping that SARS would burn itself out quickly and
not need stringent measures that would certainly result in accusations of human-
rights violations, extreme expenditures of public money, and a weakened
economy? Or would they take the strong measures needed to contain this threat
to public health? The officials chose to act and stop the spread of the disease.
The unprecedented public-health effort, which included a well-planned
campaign to enlist the commitment of the public, was a 21st-century model for
epidemic control.
    SARS also showed the importance of committing enough resources right
from the start. Massive resources went to controlling the outbreaks almost as
soon as they appeared, although in the view of some people, the relatively few
cases and deaths, compared with those from other public-health challenges
such as tuberculosis, hardly justified the level of spending. In retrospect,
spending to get rid of the new public-health threat was infinitely more cost-
effective than having to apply resources continuously over time to control the
disease. No further outbreaks occurred, neither in the winter of 2003–2004 nor
in the next one. If SARS had become endemic, the resources required to root it
out would have been enormous, especially in the winter months, and the impact
on the health system would have been incalculable.


                                                                         SARS: How a global
                                                                        epidemic was stopped   245
                 Speaking for many others in the Region, a senior Chinese expert privately
             referred to SARS as “the best thing that has ever happened to public health in
             China”. The public-health bureaucracy, under one of the most able ministers in
             the Government, has gained a new standing. Relations between the provinces
             and the centre have greatly improved. Reporting systems have been updated
             and streamlined, and important information usually flows regularly and with
             dispatch. Epidemiological services have never been better. Public-health workers,
             proud to be part of this high-profile and now clearly successful effort, are seen
             as the heroes they often are.


             LESSON 4: HUMAN-RIGHTS               ISSUES MUST BE ATTENDED TO
                In Hong Kong, Taipei, and Singapore, stopping the spread of SARS meant
             taking drastic measures. Privacy issues and human rights were hotly debated. If
             the governments involved had not acted decisively, however, the virus could
             have spread further and become endemic. The experience suggests that there
             should be international standards for the carefully considered use of
             countermeasures against dangerous communicable diseases, such as accessing
             police databases and imposing quarantine. Community surveillance, for example,
             may be effective, but could infringe on personal freedoms if used inappropriately.


             LESSON 5: THE        MEDIA PLAY A CRITICAL ROLE IN PUBLIC-
             HEALTH EMERGENCIES
                 Perhaps never before in history had the media been so involved in a public-
             health emergency. At the height of the epidemics, the world was deluged daily
             with more than 4,000 articles in English alone. Until then, only the war in Iraq
             had generated more headlines. Predictably, the reporting was uneven in quality.
             The media were sometimes accused of overstating the epidemics, causing panic
             and therefore serious economic damage to affected countries. While this
             accusation may be partly true, overall the media were in fact important allies of
             the health workers. They generally behaved responsibly and insisted on accurate
             statistics, precise scientific descriptions, and expert opinions.
                 As the epidemics progressed, government public-health programmes made
             current, complete, factual information available to dispel misunderstanding and
             panic. They received support from WHO, which took the importance of the
             media to heart, to an extent previously unheard of. The Headquarters in Geneva
             assigned skilful media officers. At the Regional Office in Manila, an experienced
             and highly able press officer, newly appointed, collaborated with the technical
             staff in fielding hundreds of telephone calls daily, appearing on radio and
             television, and releasing information regularly to the press. In Beijing and Hong
             Kong, the most badly affected cities, WHO press officers relieved the country
             office of media demands that threatened to overwhelm it. WHO Representatives


      SARS: How a global
246   epidemic was stopped
in Viet Nam, China, and the Philippines dealt with the media most effectively.
Much of the interest came from within Asia—from Hong Kong and other parts
of the region where representatives of major international media organizations
were based. The Regional Office had never been so challenged.
    The efforts were fortunately well received by the media. Despite the general
taste in the media for institution bashing, the Organization got surprisingly little
bad press. A senior reporter for an international newspaper remarked that he
had never seen an international organization—or group of countries—be so
forthright with the press. For that reason, he said, unfair attacks were highly
unlikely.
    On the other hand, besides the regular briefings, more proactive, systematic,
and thoughtful dealings with the press and the general public might have resulted
in a better-informed public and less panic.
    For the partnership between WHO and the media to be most productive,
much more needs to be done, as the events of 2005—avian flu and the health
effects of the Indian Ocean earthquakes and tsunamis—suggest. The Organization
should give this matter continued serious attention.


LESSON 6: 21ST        CENTURY SCIENCE PLAYED A RELATIVELY
SMALL ROLE IN CONTROLLING SARS;                   19TH-CENTURY
TECHNIQUES CONTINUED TO PROVE THEIR VALUE
    While modern science had its role, none of the most modern technical tools
had an important role in controlling SARS. Sequencing the genetic code of the
virus, for example, helped identify the origin and spread of the virus but did not
really help to control it. Even identifying the virus itself added nothing substantial
to control efforts, particularly since diagnostic tests were severely limited. But
laboratory tests were helpful in confirming SARS infections, especially in clinically
atypical cases.
    Most important in controlling SARS were the 19th-century public-health
strategies of contact tracing, quarantine, and isolation.


LESSON 7: PARTNERSHIPS              WORKED, BUT THE PARTNERS NEED
TO CLARIFY AND AGREE ON THEIR RELATIVE ROLES
   Possibly the greatest triumph from the SARS experience was how fiercely
and well national governments, international public health institutions, donor
agencies, and other bodies (including the media) laboured together for six months
to control the outbreaks.
   Governments. Within countries the ministry of health usually took the lead.
But the higher levels of government always stayed deeply involved to ensure a
multisectoral response. The foreign affairs, agriculture, home affairs, transport,



                                                                          SARS: How a global
                                                                         epidemic was stopped   247
             and other ministries all looked forward to a speedy end to the epidemics. The
             collaboration had perhaps the most dramatic effect in China when the
             Government finally decided to wage an all-out war against SARS. A highly
             effective monitoring and reporting system materialized almost at once, a
             community-based surveillance and disease-control system was installed, and,
             most amazingly, a 1,000-bed isolation hospital went up in little more than a
             week. In Singapore, Senior Minister Lee Kwan Yew, whose wife was quarantined
             after possibly being exposed to SARS in the outpatient unit of a hospital, gave
             an extraordinary talk to the nation. The galvanizing effect of this “fireside chat”
             by a greatly respected leader can hardly be overestimated. And airport authorities
             collaborated admirably in screening departing and arriving passengers, even if
             not many cases were detected or prevented that way.
                 Inter-governmental associations. ASEAN+3 arranged meetings on subjects
             ranging from case detection to airport measures among senior political figures
             and heads of national bureaucracies. Although hastily planned and organized,
             these meetings helped enlist high-level commitment, collaboration, and support.
             But given the difficulty and expense of organizing such meetings, perhaps more
             could have been accomplished. A general plan could be developed for meetings
             of this type, stressing the priorities and the need to recommend practicable
             forms of cooperation. Before a communicable disease emergency occurs,
             potential roles could be considered for the inter-country mechanisms of countries
             in the Region, based on their comparative strengths, and plans of action might
             be drawn up and tested in simulated conditions.
                 Government collaboration with international agencies. An impressive
             amount of goodwill surfaced during the SARS outbreaks. By and large,
             government agencies set rivalries aside; governments were forgiving of minor
             incidents of high-handedness by foreign consultants and agencies; and friendly,
             productive channels of information were maintained throughout. Clearly, in
             outbreaks within their sovereign territory national governments must be in the
             driver’s seat. In all the affected countries in Asia the governments expected
             WHO, the most prominent international partner of the ministry of public health,
             to take the lead in coordinating external inputs. This seems to have worked well
             in most cases. The Director of the United States Centers for Disease Control and
             Prevention, for one, announced several times that her agency would work with
             governments through WHO. If WHO’s Member States agree that this system
             was indeed effective and should be a model for future actions of this sort, they
             should draw up a resolution that clearly says so.
                 Conduct and protection of international staff. International staff and
             consultants contributed expertise and energy in all the affected countries. In
             general, they behaved with admirable professionalism and in genuine collegiality
             with their national hosts. But in a very few cases, complaints of “data smuggling”
             and withholding of information in hopes of early publication were heard. Some


      SARS: How a global
248   epidemic was stopped
complaints may have been prompted by distrust of “neo-colonial” approaches;
others may have had at least some basis in fact. It must be emphasized that
consultants and other foreign experts work in foreign countries only at the
invitation of the governments and with their support.
    Soon after the outbreaks made the news, it became impossible to arrange
transport home or to regional medical centres for individuals who may have
been infected. Even the international medical “rescue” agencies refused to transfer
these people to isolation and care facilities. The issue of insurance and liability
for consultants on short-term contracts was never fully resolved. In anticipation
of future outbreaks of communicable diseases, these issues should be discussed
and approaches agreed upon, to protect the individuals involved as well as the
agencies coordinating the investigation and management of epidemics.


LESSON 8: MODERN            MODES OF COMMUNICATION
DRAMATICALLY CHANGED THE WAY WE WORK
    The use of modern methods of electronic communication to control a major
disease outbreak was perhaps without precedent in the history of public health.
WHO Headquarters and the Regional Office in Manila communicated by
telephone dozens of times a day from the very first days of the epidemics, often
several times in a single hour. The result was constantly updated information
and synchronized reporting.
    A Singaporean physician who had treated his country’s first cases of SARS
and then attended a medical conference in the United States of America became
feverish while flying from New York to Singapore, via Europe. On his way, he
called a friend in Singapore to say that he was ill. The friend at once phoned the
Health Ministry, and the senior epidemiologist at the ministry relayed the
information by phone to the Communicable Diseases Director at the WHO
Regional Office in Manila. A call from the Director to Geneva roused an officer
of the Emergency Response office in the middle of the night. He alerted German
public health authorities and officials at the Frankfurt airport. Barrier infection-
control equipment was rushed to the airport, and the physician and his family,
as soon as their plane landed, were whisked off to an isolation facility. As a
result, although the Singaporean physician, his wife, his mother-in-law, and a
flight attendant were confirmed to have SARS, they eventually recovered fully
and returned to Singapore. (The German physician who supervised their
successful treatment later helped treat Dr Carlo Urbani of WHO. Despite expert
care, however, Dr Urbani died of the disease he had first characterized.)
    The multiparty teleconference connected many participants at different sites
through office telephones, mobile phones, and specially designed multi-
microphone telephones in conference rooms. At the Regional Office,
teleconferences constantly under way, it seemed, in the operations room, took
up much of the working day. A nightly teleconference at 10 p.m., Manila time,

                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                       epidemic was stopped   249
             and usually lasting well over an hour, involved the Director-General and her
             staff in Geneva; regional offices in Manila, New Delhi, Cairo, Harare, and
             Washington, DC; WHO country offices in Beijing, Hanoi, Bangkok, and Kuala
             Lumpur; and consultants in Singapore and Hong Kong. There were often up to
             50 participants. As the outbreaks waned, these mega-conferences became less
             frequent, taking place on weekends only when needed, and eventually
             happening only twice or thrice weekly.
                 The conferences lacked focus. While some participants were being briefed
             on the global outbreak, others were dealing with minute details. Inevitably,
             some participants took the opportunity to promote themselves; others were
             daunted by the high level of participation. It was an inefficient way to synchronize
             figures—case and death totals, for example—and the variety of participants,
             which included journalists in some offices, made politically sensitive discussion
             (such as negative remarks about government actions) risky. As the focus and
             usefulness of the conference became less and less clear, participants in the Manila
             office, who had generally been working continuously for 16 hours before then,
             began to show the strain and to participate with much less enthusiasm. Such
             conferences must be expertly planned in the future.
                 Videoconferences were held intermittently during the outbreaks. The
             conferences, at which key government figures and WHO officials sat arrayed
             before flags or emblems and addressed speeches to one another, were time-
             consuming; had to be held in a specially fitted room, away from the scene of
             action; were prone to technical disruptions; and served little purpose other
             than the political benefits that might accrue from participants being able to see
             one another face to face.
                 The Internet proved its public-health worth during the outbreaks. Email
             reached such a huge volume (upwards of 400 messages a day for key staff) that
             it could not be relied on to transmit breaking news—the telephone was better
             suited for that. But email was ideal for sending figures, documents, reports,
             guidelines, training presentations, tables, graphs and photos instantly, and was
             used fully for that purpose. Ground rules should be established for the use of
             email in future outbreaks.
                 The Canada-based Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN) has
             shown how the Internet can be used more creatively, and much can be learned
             from their experience [see Chapter 2].


             LESSON 9: CLEAR TRAVEL GUIDANCE IS NEEDED
                In the handling of the SARS outbreaks, this aspect was possibly the most
             controversial. The effect of the travel advisories on the overall global epidemic
             cannot be ascertained. WHO was accused of overplaying the danger of the
             epidemics, and of thereby being partly to blame for their economic severity.



      SARS: How a global
250   epidemic was stopped
Others questioned whether WHO even had a mandate for such drastic action.
It must be remembered that the world was confronted with a highly infectious,
frequently fatal disease for which the cause was not known, the modes of
transmission were not understood, and no effective treatment was available.
Health-care workers were disproportionately affected, and the virus was seen
to spread by international travel. Its emergence had been sudden and explosive,
and for a while at least it seemed as if the world was coming to an end.
    WHO, in fact, was reluctant to recommend travel restrictions. When it did
take this step for the first time, many countries had already asked their citizens
to avoid non-crucial travel to affected areas, or had recommended even broader
restrictions. Some had criticized what they saw to be WHO’s timid reluctance
to act decisively. But the WHO advisories, once issued, were taken very seriously,
perhaps even more so than those of the United States. The Organization’s
mandate to take a similar step in the future must be made absolutely clear.
Hopefully, the revised International Health Regulations will define the
circumstances where such action is warranted, and the steps that should be
taken before a firm recommendation is made to avoid certain destinations.


LESSON 10: ANIMAL           HUSBANDRY AND MARKETING PRACTICES
SERIOUSLY AFFECT HUMAN HEALTH
    The SARS outbreaks, particularly in southern China, exposed shocking but
all too common practices in the exotic food trade. Although it is still unclear
how wild animals destined for human consumption help spread SARS, the ways
in which they are handled, marketed, and slaughtered pose obvious dangers to
human health. Good veterinary habits are rare in markets where live animals
are sold for the table. Aside from the question of cruelty in handling and
slaughtering, animals that would never meet in the wild are kept close to one
another, often in stacked cages, raising the risk of cross-infection and the
emergence of new pathogens potentially dangerous to man.
    If the practice is to continue—and it will certainly be difficult to eradicate,
or even make less prevalent, given increasing affluence in the region and the
taste for exotic dishes—measures should be implemented for the least dangerous
methods of provision of these exotic species for human consumption.
    For domestic animals and poultry, the very close proximity of animal pens
and cages to human habitation in many crowded settlements would also appear
to make zoonotic infections more likely. This issue is especially relevant to the
current H5N1 situation.




                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   251
             LESSON 11: WHO          SHOULD BE ON THE FRONT LINES?
                WHO was effective as the prime partner of national ministries of health,
             worldwide, in the region, and in the individual affected countries. The
             Organization not only helped with policy development and coordination, but
             also reassigned its own staff, redefined their terms of reference, provided
             emergency supplies and equipment, and fielded expert consultants. However,
             the question remains: Is WHO the most appropriate organization to plan and
             implement such activities in the field? Could the Organization take on this role
             again, in an emergency perhaps more complex? Earlier in its history, WHO had
             provided Member States with a wide range of field workers: epidemiologists,
             laboratory technologists, sanitarians, clinicians, and nurses, among other
             specialists. WHO country teams were large, young, and mobile. However,
             demands on the Organization have changed over the years. Member States
             today seldom request WHO staff to directly implement or participate in disease
             control operations. Staff numbers in country offices have shrunk, and the
             functions of WHO country teams have leaned more towards health planning,
             standards setting, research, high-level consultation, and policy formulation.
                It surprised many that WHO could change its methods. Now, all of a sudden,
             WHO had created a “war room” coordinating function at headquarters and
             regional offices, and was sending staff to the field to investigate the outbreaks
             and implement control measures. Others wondered how the Organization could
             enlist overnight the participation of hundreds of consultants and dozens of
             partner agencies. WHO identified effective field workers and appropriate
             agencies through personal contacts, and innovatively reprogrammed available
             funds. Donor governments responded quickly and generously.
                This time the arrangement worked. Can it work in an outbreak that might be
             more complex and prolonged? If WHO is to take on this responsibility in the
             future, it must clarify the roles of partner agencies and identify potentially
             available experts of proven worth. To act quickly, it should be able to mobilize
             resources rapidly and access stockpiles of supplies and equipment. Networks
             like GOARN can provide high-quality laboratory support and short-term
             expertise at very short notice, but a longer-term situation will require months or
             more of continued support from large numbers of people.


             LESSON 12: WITH NATIONAL DISEASE SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS
             IN DISREPAIR, INFORMAL AVENUES OF REPORTING MUST BE
             TAKEN SERIOUSLY
                The SARS outbreaks revealed how ineffective disease surveillance and
             outbreak alert systems are in most countries, apart from the wealthier ones.
             Even where surveillance systems are well developed, they seldom function
             adequately as “early warning systems” because of inherent bureaucratic delays


      SARS: How a global
252   epidemic was stopped
and insufficient collaboration among response agencies. Specifically, in most
countries, information exchange, joint analysis, and monitoring do not take
place between health care facilities (especially private ones) and the public
health authority. As a result, “informal” reports have become crucial in
identifying and monitoring outbreaks.
    Ubiquitous mobile telephones and text messaging, mushrooming Internet
cafés, newspaper websites, email and “blogs” with their instant information and
opinions—these informal channels are much more likely to report unusual disease
events first, long before government releases do. Without official information
and analysis, rumours can spiral out of control, spreading fear and panic.
Governments must become better able to collect credible information and report
it early. They must replan their disease surveillance systems, assign them to
adequately trained people, and supervise their operation.


LESSON 13: TRAINING            AND EXPERTISE IN BARRIER NURSING
AND HOSPITAL INFECTION CONTROL ARE SADLY DEFICIENT IN
THE REGION
   This important topic deserves separate mention. Unlike other expertise needed
to deal with SARS, infection-control practices were poorly developed in many
countries of the region. Support staff and administrative personnel, and even
nursing and medical professionals, knew little about how to protect themselves
from contagious diseases. Outside the capitals, isolation procedures were quite
primitive. There was little understanding of personal protection measures and
patient rooms set up to limit air- and fomite-borne spread. Most hospitals lacked
even the most basic equipment. The “developed” countries of the region had
the expertise, but could transfer it only with difficulty to hospitals where
conditions were less than ideal. Now national authorities, with the help of WHO
and other agencies, are well placed to establish or strengthen training in infection
control for physicians and nurses.


CONCLUSION
   The SARS epidemics of 2003 showed what countries with limited resources,
in collaboration with international partners, are capable of doing to limit
outbreaks of disease. In many ways, the odds were stacked on the side of success.
The virus itself was amenable to control, and the potential economic impact of
a serious disease spread by international travel was such that governmental
commitment was guaranteed. One would hope that such commitment, both by
national governments and the international community, could be enlisted in
support of less dramatic events, with less immediate economic importance,
posing less of a threat to privileged citizens of industrialized countries. Many
examples of inadequate commitment can be cited: the African malaria situation,


                                                                        SARS: How a global
                                                                       epidemic was stopped   253
             or the global tuberculosis problem, or even localized but devastating conditions
             such as Ebola or Marburg virus.
                 The SARS experience has not been examined critically enough, and the
             lessons learnt have not been thoroughly analysed. It is repugnant to think of the
             SARS outbreaks, which killed nearly 800 human beings, as a “dry run” for the
             next major, perhaps even more deadly, outbreak. But it would be tragic if we
             did not learn from the experience of 2003 and make the most of it. We would
             not be fulfilling our responsibilities to those, including our medical colleagues
             and friends, who died of SARS.




      SARS: How a global
254   epidemic was stopped
APPENDICES




              SARS: How a global
             epidemic was stopped   255
      SARS: How a global
256   epidemic was stopped
                  APPENDIX 1:
       WHO ISSUES A GLOBAL ALERT

          ABOUT CASES OF ATYPICAL

                           PNEUMONIA




CASES    OF SEVERE RESPIRATORY ILLNESS MAY SPREAD TO
HOSPITAL STAFF
     12 March 2003 | GENEVA – Since mid-February, WHO has been actively
working to confirm reports of outbreaks of a severe form of pneumonia in
Viet Nam, Hong Kong (China), and Guangdong Province in China.
     In Viet Nam the outbreak began with a single initial case who was
hospitalized for treatment of severe, acute respiratory syndrome of unknown
origin. He felt unwell during his journey and fell ill shortly after arrival in Hanoi
from Shanghai and Hong Kong. Following his admission to the hospital,
approximately 20 hospital staff became sick with similar symptoms.
     The signs and symptoms of the disease in Hanoi include initial flu-like illness
(rapid onset of high fever followed by muscle aches, headache and sore throat).
These are the most common symptoms. Early laboratory findings may include
thrombocytopenia (low platelet count) and leucopenia (low white blood cell
count). In some, but not all cases, this is followed by bilateral pneumonia, in
some cases progressing to acute respiratory distress requiring assisted breathing
on a respirator. Some patients are recovering but some patients remain critically
ill.
     Today, the Department of Health Hong Kong has reported on an outbreak
of respiratory illness in one of its public hospitals. As of midnight 11 March,
50 health-care workers had been screened and 23 of them were found to have
febrile illness. They were admitted to the hospital for observation as a
precautionary measure. In this group, eight have developed early chest X-ray
signs of pneumonia. Their conditions are stable. Three other health-care workers
self-presented to hospitals with febrile illness and two of them have chest X-ray
signs of pneumonia.


                                                                         SARS: How a global
                                                                        epidemic was stopped   257
                 Investigation by Hong Kong public-health authorities is ongoing. The Hospital
             Authority has increased infection-control measures to prevent the spread of the
             disease in the hospital. So far, no link has been found between these cases and
             the outbreak in Hanoi.
                 In mid-February, the Government of China reported that 305 cases of atypical
             pneumonia, with five deaths, had occurred in Guangdong Province. In two
             cases that died, Chlamydia infection was found. Further investigations of the
             cause of the outbreak are ongoing. Overall the outbreaks in Hanoi and
             Hong Kong appear to be confined to the hospital environment. Those at highest
             risk appear to be staff caring for the patients.
                 No link has so far been made between these outbreaks of acute respiratory
             illness in Hanoi and Hong Kong and the outbreak of ‘bird flu’, A(H5N1) in
             Hong Kong reported on 19 February. Further investigations continue and
             laboratory tests on specimens from Viet Nam and Hong Kong are being studied
             by WHO collaborating centres in Japan and the United States of America.
                 Until more is known about the cause of these outbreaks, WHO recommends
             patients with atypical pneumonia who may be related to these outbreaks be
             isolated with barrier nursing techniques. At the same time, WHO recommends
             that any suspect cases be reported to national health authorities.
                 WHO is in close contact with relevant national authorities and has also
             offered epidemiological, laboratory and clinical support. WHO is working with
             national authorities to ensure appropriate investigation, reporting and
             containment of these outbreaks.




      SARS: How a global
258   epidemic was stopped
                  APPENDIX 2:
  WHO ISSUES EMERGENCY TRAVEL

                              ADVISORY




   15 March 2003 | GENEVA – During the past week, WHO has received
reports of more than 150 new suspected cases of severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS), an atypical pneumonia for which cause has not yet been
determined. Reports to date have been received from Canada, China,
Hong Kong (China), Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and
Viet Nam. Early today, an ill passenger and companions who travelled from
New York, United States of America, and who landed in Frankfurt, Germany,
were removed from their flight and taken to hospital isolation.
   Due to the spread of SARS to several countries in a short period of time, the
World Health Organization today has issued emergency guidance for travellers
and airlines.
   “This syndrome, SARS, is now a worldwide health threat,” said Dr Gro Harlem
Brundtland, Director-General of the World Health Organization. “The world
needs to work together to find its cause, cure the sick, and stop its spread.”
   There is presently no recommendation for people to restrict travel to any
destination. However, in response to enquiries from governments, airlines,
physicians, and travellers, WHO is now offering guidance for travellers, airline
crew, and airlines. The exact nature of the infection is still under investigation
and this guidance is based on the early information available to WHO.
   TRAVELLERS INCLUDING AIRLINE CREW: All travellers should be aware of
main symptoms and signs of SARS, which include:

    ·   high fever (>38 ºC)

        AND

    ·   one or more respiratory symptom including cough, shortness of breath,
        difficulty breathing




                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   259
                   AND one or more of the following:

                   · close contact* with a person who has been diagnosed with SARS
                   · recent history of travel to areas reporting cases of SARS.

             In the unlikely event of a traveller experiencing this combination of symptoms
             they should seek medical attention and ensure that information about their
             recent travel is passed on to the health-care staff. Any traveller who develops
             these symptoms is advised not to undertake further travel until they have
             recovered.
                 AIRLINES: Should a passenger or crewmember who meets the criteria above
             travel on a flight, the aircraft should alert the destination airport. On arrival the
             sick passenger should be referred to airport health authorities for assessment
             and management. The aircraft passengers and crew should be informed of the
             person’s status as a suspect case of SARS. The passengers and crew should provide
             all contact details for the subsequent 14 days to the airport health authorities.
             There are currently no indications to restrict the onward travel of healthy
             passengers, but all passengers and crew should be advised to seek medical
             attention if they develop the symptoms highlighted above. There is currently no
             indication to provide passengers and crew with any medication or investigation
             unless they become ill.
                 In the absence of specific information regarding the nature of the organism
             causing this illness, specific measures to be applied to the aircraft cannot be
             recommended. As a general precaution the aircraft may be disinfected in the
             manner described in the WHO Guide to Hygiene and Sanitation in Aviation.

                ***
                As more information has become available, WHO-recommended SARS case
             definitions have been revised as follows:

             SUSPECT CASE
                  A person presenting after 1 February 2003 with history of:

                   ·     high fever (>38 ºC)

                   AND

                   ·     one or more respiratory symptom including cough, shortness of breath,
                         difficulty breathing
                   ·     close contact* with a person who has been diagnosed with SARS
                   ·     recent history of travel to areas reporting cases of SARS.
             *    Close contact means having cared for, having lived with, or having had direct contact with respiratory secretions
                 and body fluids of a person with SARS.


      SARS: How a global
260   epidemic was stopped
PROBABLE CASE
   A suspect case with chest X-ray findings of pneumonia or Respiratory Distress
Syndrome

    OR

   A person with an unexplained respiratory illness resulting in death, with an
autopsy examination demonstrating the pathology of Respiratory Distress
Syndrome without an identifiable cause


COMMENTS
   In addition to fever and respiratory symptoms, SARS may be associated with
other symptoms including: headache, muscular stiffness, loss of appetite, malaise,
confusion, rash, and diarrhoea.

    ***

    Until more is known about the cause of these outbreaks, WHO recommends
that patients with SARS be isolated with barrier nursing techniques and treated
as clinically indicated. At the same time, WHO recommends that any suspect
cases be reported to national health authorities.
    WHO is in close communication with all national authorities and has also
offered epidemiological, laboratory and clinical support. WHO is working with
national authorities to ensure appropriate investigation, reporting, and
containment of these outbreaks.




                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   261
                               APPENDIX 3:
                 AFFECTED AREAS AND PATTERNS

                             OF LOCAL TRANSMISSION




                 From 16 March 2003, WHO reported on “affected areas” defined as a region
             at the first administrative level where the country is reporting local transmission
             of SARS.
                 From 12 April, some of the affected areas were identified as lower risk if they
             had “limited local transmission and no evidence of international spread from
             area since 15 March 2003 and no transmission other than close person-to-
             person contact reported.”
                 From 28 April, the definion of “affected area” was changed to “a region at
             the first administrative level where the country is reporting local transmission of
             SARS, within the last 20 days, or two maximum incubation periods.”
                 From 2 May, WHO replaced “affected areas” with “countries with recent
             local transmission” using this definition: “Recent local transmission has occurred
             when, in the last 20 days, one or more reported probable cases of SARS have
             most likely acquired their infection locally regardless of the setting in which
             this may have occurred.” In addition, the extent of local transmission was
             categorized:

                    + Low             ++ Medium            +++ High             Uncertain
              Imported             More than one       High                  Insufficient
              probable SARS        generation of       Transmission          information
              case(s) have         local probable      pattern other         available to
              produced only        SARS cases, but     than that             specify areas or
              one generation of    only among          described in +        extent of local
              local probable       persons that have   and ++.               transmission.
              cases, all of        been previously
              whom are direct      identified and
              personal contacts    followed-up as
              of the imported      known contacts
              case(s).             of probable SARS
                                   cases.

      SARS: How a global
262   epidemic was stopped
    From 8 May, the definition of +++ (High) transmission pattern was “local
probable cases occurring among persons who have not been previously identified
as known contacts of probable SARS cases.”
    From 10 May, a new definition was used: “Local transmission has occurred
when one or more reported probable cases of SARS have most likely acquired
their infection locally regardless of the setting in which this may have occurred.
If no new locally acquired cases are identified 20 days after the last reported
locally acquired probable case died or was appropriately isolated, the area will
be removed from this list.”
    The names of the three patterns of spread were changed. Pattern A, B, and C
replaced + Low, ++ Medium, and +++ High, but the definitions stayed the same
(i.e. the definion for pattern A was the same as had been used for +, etc.)




                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   263
                    Table 1. Areas that experienced local transmission of SARS a,b,c

              Country                 Area                             From d                                  Toe
              Viet Nam                Hanoi                            23 Feb 03                           27 Apr 03
              Mongolia                Ulaanbaatar                      5 Apr 03                            9 May 03
              Philippines             Manila                           6 Apr 03                            19 May 03
              China                   Jiangsu                          19 Apr 03                           21 May 03
              China                   Hubei                            17 Apr 03                           26 May 03
              China                   Tianjin                          16 Apr 03                           28 May 03
              China                   Jilin                            1 Apr 03                            29 May 03
              China                   Shaanxi                          12 Apr 03                           29 May 03
              Singapore               Singapore                        25 Feb 03                           31 May 03
              China                   Inner Mongolia                   4 Mar 03                             3 Jun 03
                                                                                   f
              China                   Guangdong                        16 Nov 02                            7 Jun 03
              China                   Hebei                            19 Apr 03                           10 Jun 03
              China                   Shanxi                           8 Mar 03                            13 Jun 03
              China                   Beijing                          2 Mar 03                            18 Jun 03
              China                   Hong Kong                        15 Feb 03                           22 Jun 03
              Canada                  Greater Toronto Area             23 Feb 03                            2 Jul 03
              China                   Taiwan                           25 Feb 03                            5 Jul 03


              a. Local transmission occurred when one or more reported probable cases of SARS most likely acquired their
              infection locally regardless of the setting in which this may have occurred.
              b. The United Kingdom had previously reported local transmission in London; the United Kingdom case associated
              with local transmission was discarded on 12 May 2003 as the clinical picture and laboratory findings were
              consistent with influenza.
              c. The United States of America had previously reported local transmission associated with two independent
              imported cases with dates of onsets of illness on 13 March and 16 March 2003. The source of infection is
              uncertain for one of the secondary cases whose onset of illness was 18 March and who had travelled with one
              of these two imported cases. The secondary case associated with other imported case has subsequently been
              discarded.
              d. The “from” date is the date of onset of the first imported case that most likely started a local chain of
              transmission.
              e. The “to” date is 20 days after the last reported locally acquired probable case died or was appropriately isolated.
              The period during which local transmission occurred includes the “from” and “to” dates.




      SARS: How a global
264   epidemic was stopped
                  APPENDIX 4:
             CASE DEFINITIONS FOR

  SURVEILLANCE OF SEVERE ACUTE

   RESPIRATORY SYNDROME (SARS)

                (REVISED 1 MAY 2003)




OBJECTIVE
   To describe the epidemiology of SARS and to monitor the magnitude and
the spread of this disease, in order to provide advice on prevention and control.


INTRODUCTION
    The surveillance case definitions based on available clinical and
epidemiological data are now being supplemented by a number of laboratory
tests and will continue to be reviewed as tests currently used in research settings
become more widely available as diagnostic tests. Preliminary clinical description
of severe acute respiratory syndrome (www.who.int/csr/sars/clinical/en/)
summarizes what is currently known about the clinical features of SARS. Countries
may need to adapt case definitions depending on their own disease situation.
Retrospective surveillance is not expected.
    Clinicians are advised that patients should not have their case definition
category downgraded while awaiting results of laboratory testing or on the bases
of negative results. See Use of laboratory methods for SARS diagnosis
(www.who.int/csr/sars/labmethods/).




                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   265
             SUSPECT CASE
                  1. A person presenting after 1 November 2002* with history of:

                        ·           high fever (>38 °C)

                        AND

                        ·           cough or breathing difficulty

                        AND one or more of the following exposures during the 10 days prior
                        to onset of symptoms:

                        ·           close contact** with a person who is a suspect or probable case
                                    of SARS
                        ·           history of travel to an area with recent local transmission of
                                    SARS
                        ·           residing in an area with recent local transmission of SARS.

                  2. A person with an unexplained acute respiratory illness resulting in death
                     after 1 November 2002,* but on whom no autopsy has been performed

                        AND one or more of the following exposures during to 10 days prior to
                        onset of symptoms:

                        ·           close contact with a person who is a suspect or probable case
                                    of SARS
                        ·           history of travel to an area with recent local transmission of
                                    SARS
                        ·           residing in an area with recent local transmission of SARS.


             PROBABLE CASE
                  1. A suspect case with radiographic evidence of infiltrates consistent with
                     pneumonia or respiratory distress syndrome on chest X-ray.
                  2. A suspect case of SARS that is positive for SARS coronavirus by one or
                     more assays. See Use of laboratory methods for SARS diagnosis.
                  3. A suspect case with autopsy findings consistent with the pathology of
                     respiratory distress syndrome without an identifiable cause.


             *   The surveillance begins on 1 November 2002 to capture cases of atypical pneumonia in China now recognized
                as SARS. International tranmission of SARS was first reported in March 2003 for cases with onset in February 2003.
             ** Close contact: having cared for, lived with, or had direct contact with respiratory secretions or body fluids of a
                suspect or probable case of SARS.


      SARS: How a global
266   epidemic was stopped
EXCLUSION CRITERIA
    A case should be excluded if an alternative diagnosis can fully explain their
illness.


RECLASSIFICATION OF CASES
   As SARS is currently a diagnosis of exclusion, the status of a reported case
may change over time. A patient should always be managed as clinically
appropriate, regardless of their case status.
    · A case initially classified as suspect or probable, for whom an alternative
       diagnosis can fully explain the illness, should be discarded after carefully
       considering the possibility of co-infection.
    · A suspect case who, after investigation, fulfils the probable case definition
       should be reclassified as “probable”.
    · A suspect case with a normal chest X-ray should be treated, as deemed
       appropriate, and monitored for 7 days. Those cases in whom recovery
       is inadequate should be re-evaluated by chest X-ray.
    · Those suspect cases in whom recovery is adequate but whose illness
       cannot be fully explained by an alternative diagnosis should remain as
       “suspect”.
    · A suspect case who dies, on whom no autopsy is conducted, should
       remain classified as “suspect”. However, if this case is identified as being
       part of a chain transmission of SARS, the case should be reclassified as
       “probable”.
    · If an autopsy is conducted and no pathological evidence of respiratory
       distress syndrome is found, the case should be “discarded”.


REPORTING PROCEDURES
    All probable SARS cases should be managed in the same way for the purposes
of infection control and outbreak containment. See Management of severe acute
respiratory syndrome (www.who.int/csr/sars/management/).
    At this time, WHO is maintaining surveillance for clinically apparent cases
only ie probable and suspect cases of SARS. (Testing of clinically well contacts
of probable or suspect SARS cases and community based serological surveys
are being conducted as part of epidemiological studies which may ultimately
change our understanding of SARS transmission. However, persons who test
SARS-CoV positive in these studies will not be notified as SARS cases to WHO at
this time).
    Where laboratory tests are not available or not done, probable SARS cases
as currently defined above should continue to be reported in the agreed format.




                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   267
                Suspect cases with positive laboratory results will be reclassified as probable
             cases for notification purposes only if the testing laboratories use appropriate
             quality control procedures.
                No distinction will be made between probable cases with or without a positive
             laboratory result and suspect cases with a positive result for the purposes of
             global surveillance. WHO will negotiate sentinel surveillance of SARS with
             selected partners to collect detailed epidemiological, laboratory and clinical
             data.
                Cases that meet the surveillance case definition for SARS should not be
             discarded on the basis of negative laboratory tests at this time.


             RATIONALE FOR RETAINING THE CURRENT SURVEILLANCE CASE
             DEFINITIONS FOR SARS
                 The reason for retaining the clinical and epidemiological basis for the case
             definitions is that at present there is no validated, widely and consistently
             available test for infection with the SARS coronavirus. Antibody tests may not
             become positive for three or more weeks after the onset of symptoms. We do
             not yet know if all patients will mount an antibody response. Molecular assays
             must be performed using appropriate reagents and controls under strictly
             controlled conditions, and may not be positive in the early stages of illness
             using currently available reagents. We are not yet able to define the optimal
             specimen to be tested at any given stage of the illness. This information is accruing
             as more tests are being performed on patients with known exposures and/or
             accompanied by good clinical and epidemiological information. We hope that
             in the near future an accessible and validated diagnostic assay(s) will become
             available which can be employed with confidence at a defined, early stage of
             the illness.




      SARS: How a global
268   epidemic was stopped
       APPENDIX 5: PEOPLE
     WHO WORKED ON SARS
     RESPONSE, FEBRUARY TO
           JULY 2003
    The following tables list the technical staff and consultants who provided
WHO with support during the SARS pandemic. Key staff from WHO country
offices (CO), regional offices and Headquarters, who were involved in the
response, are also listed. It should be noted that many more people, other than
technical experts, also devoted their time and skills. Areas of expertise are
categorized into: clinical (Clin); communications (Com); epidemiological and
public health (Epi); infection control (Inf C); laboratory (Lab); logistics (Log);
psychological (Psy); and animal health (Zoo).


CAMBODIA
Name                 Organization, Country              Area of work Start date End date
Clayton, Penelope                                           Inf C     13 May    13 Jun
Daily, Dr Frances    Independent consultant,                Inf C      19 Apr   13 Jun
                     Cambodia
Merklen, Bernard     Independent consultant,                Log        19 Jun    29 Jul
                     Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Morita, Dr Kouichi   Nagasaki University, Japan              Epi       14 Apr   21 May
Vong, Dr Sirenda     Centers for Disease Control and         Epi      10 May     11 Jun
                     Prevention (CDC),
                     United States of America (USA)
Witt, Dr Clara       Walter Reed Army Institute              Epi      20 May    16 Jun
                     of Research, USA



CHINA
Name                 Organization, Country              Area of work Start date End date
Aguilera,            Ministry of Health, Chile               Epi      15 May    15 Jun
Dr Ximena
Anderson, Dr Roy     Imperial College London Medical         Epi       11 Jun   14 Jun
                     School, United Kingdom of Great
                     Britain and Northern Ireland
Balasegaram,         Freelance writer, Malaysia             Com        13 Apr   17 May
Mangai




                                                                                           269
             Barboza, Philippe    Institut de Veille Sanitaire, France       Epi     12 Apr     17 May
             Bekedam, Dr Henk     WHO Representative in China                CO      10 Feb
             Brantsaeter,         Norwegian Institute of Public Health,      Inf C   10 May     8 Jun
             Dr Arne Broch        Norway
             Breiman,             The International Centre for Diarrhoeal    Lab     22 Mar     5 Apr
             Dr Robert Fredric    Disease Research, Bangladesh (ICDDR, B)
             Broadbent, Clive                                                Inf C   25 May     17 Jun
             Chin, Daniel         WHO, China                                 CO      10 Feb     30 Jul
             Chow, Dr Catherine   CDC, USA                                   Epi     12 May     08 Jun
             Chu,                 CDC, USA                                   Lab     07 Jun     08 Jul
             Dr May Chin-May
             Cocksedge,           WHO Headquarters, Switzerland              Inf C   27 Apr     05 May
             Dr Sandy
             Coulombier, Dr Denis WHO, Lyon, France                          Epi     11 Jun     15 Jun


             De Main, Yvonne      Australia                                  Inf C   10 May     20 July
             Dietz,               Communications expert, USA                 Com     15 May     11 Aug
             Mr Robert Karl
             Doran, Dr Rodger     WHO, Viet Nam                              CO      11 Jun     17 Jul
             Dowell, Dr Scott     International Emerging Infectons           Epi     26 Apr     1 May
                                  Programme (IEIP), CDC, Thaland
             Dumont, Serge        Springford Investment Ltd                  Com     30 Apr     15 Jun
             Dwyer,               Westmead Hospital, Australia               Lab     9 May      9 Jun
             Dr Dominic Edmund
             Dziekan,             Ministry of Health, Germany                Inf C   21 Jun     28 Jul
             Dr Gerald
             Evans, Dr Meirion    University of Wales College of Medicine,   Epi     23 Mar      6 Apr
                                  United Kingdom                                     27 Apr     15 May
             Feikin,              National Center for Infectious             Epi      8 Jun      3 Jul
             Dr Daniel Ross       Diseases, CDC, USA
             Field, Dr Hume       Animal Research Institute, Australia       Zoo     4 May      18 May
             Fleerackers,         Independent consultant, Belgium            Epi     11 Jun     10 Sep
             Dr Yon
             Fukuda, Dr Keiji     CDC, USA                                   Epi     22 Feb     10 Mar
                                                                                     20 April   16 May
             Giesecke, Dr Johan   Swedish Institute for                      Epi     15 Jun     28 Jun
                                  Infectious Disease Control, Sweden
             Giesecke, Dr Kajsa   Sodertalje Hospital, Sweden                Epi     15 Jun     28 Jun
             Grein, Dr Tom        WHO Headquarters, Switzerland              Epi     11 Jun     14 Jun
             Hardiman, Dr Max     WHO Headquarters, Switzerland              Epi     29 May     5 Jun
             Heymann,             WHO Headquarters, Switzerland              Epi     11 Jun     14 Jun
             Dr David
             Hoffman,                                                        Inf C   21 May     17 Jun
             Peter Nicholas



      SARS: How a global
270   epidemic was stopped
Killingsworth,         WHO, China                                           May       Jul
James
Lee, Dr Chin-Kei       Australian National University,             Epi     5 May
                       Australia
Lee, Dr Lisa Ann       WHO, China                                  CO       May       Jul
Legros,                Epicentre, France                           Epi     7 Jun    15 Jun
Dr Dominique
Li, Dr Ailan           WHO, China                                  CO      10 Feb
Li, Dr Jin                                                         Lab     25 May   5 Jun
Lu, Dr Xiuhua                                                      Lab     16 Mar   29 Mar
Mackenzie,             University of Queensland, Australia         Lab     22 Mar   29 Mar
Professor John S.
Maguire,               CDC, USA                                    Clin    22 Mar   25 May
Dr James Harvey
McFarland, Jeff        WHO, Western Pacific Regional               Epi     5 Apr    31 May
                       Office, Philippines
McMahon,               CDC, USA                                    Epi     7 Jun    29 Jun
Dr Shawn Renee
Meyer, Dr Elizabeth    University Hospital Freiburg, Germany       Inf C   21 Jul   7 Sep
Mishima, Dr Noboyuki SOS Clinic, China                             Inf C   15 Jun   26 Jun
Ni, Dr Daxin                                                       Epi     29 May   30 Jun
Nygard, Dr Karin       Norwegian Institute of Public Health,       Epi     14 Jun   30 Jun
                       Norway
Oishi, Dr Kazunori     Nagasaki University, Japan                  Clin    12 May   11 Jul
Oshitani, Dr Hitoshi   WHO, Western Pacific Regional Office,       Epi     23 Feb   10 Mar
                       Philippines
Palmer, James                                                      Com     5 Apr    19 Apr
Pappas, Tony           WHO Headquarters, Switzerland               Com     26 May   4 Jun
Patel,                 Australian National University, Australia   Epi     10 Jun   15 Jun
Dr Mahomed Said
Pickles, Dr Hilary     Health Protection Agency, United Kingdom    Inf C   22 May   4 Jun
Powell, Chris          WHO Headquarters, Switzerland               Com     23 Mar   30 Mar
Preiser, Dr Wolfgang Institute of Virology,                        Lab     23 Mar   27 Apr
                     J.W. Goethe University, Germany
Rademackers, James                                                 Com     5 Apr    19 Apr
Rodier, Dr Guenael     WHO Headquarters, Switzerland               Epi     11 Jun   14 Jun
Schnur, Alan           WHO, China                                  CO      10 Feb    5 Jul
Schuchat, Dr Anne      CDC, USA                                    Epi     12 May   12 Jun
Shapiro, Dr Craig      CDC, USA                                    Epi     12 Jun   30 Jun
Smyth, Garrett         WHO Headquarters, Switzerland               Com     3 Jun    13 Jun
Stielow, Janice        Royal Victorian Eye & Ear Hospital,         Inf C   1 May    13 Jun
                       Australia
Stöhr, Dr Klaus        WHO Headquarters, Switzerland               Lab     24 Jun   10 Jul



                                                                                             271
             Tam, Dr John         Chinese University of Hong Kong, China                 25 May     5 Jun
             Tashiro, Dr Masato   National Institute of Infectious Diseases,   Lab        24 Feb    8 Mar
                                  Japan
             Tull, Dr Peet        National Board of Health and Welfare,         Epi       9 May    14 Jun
                                  Sweden
             Uggowitzer, Steve    WHO Headquarters, Switzerland                Com        26 May    4 Jun
             Watanabe, Dr Hiroshi Nagasaki University, Japan                   Inf C      2 May    15 Jun
             Xu, Dr Fujie         CDC, USA                                      Epi       10 Jun    11 Jul
             Xu, Dr Ruiheng                                                     Epi       21 Apr   24 Apr
             Xu, Dr Xiyan         CDC, USA                                     Lab        15 Mar   29 Mar
             Yang, Dr Chen-Fu     CDC, USA                                     Lab        25 May    20 Jul
             Yap,                 Australia                                    Inf C      9 May     5 Jul
             Dr Desiree Swei Lein
             Zhang, Dr Wenqing    WHO Headquarters, Switzerland                Lab        24 Jun    10 Jul
             Zhang, Pengfei       WHO, Western Pacific Regional Office,                    May       Jul
                                  Philippines
             Zhou, Dr Sheng                                                     Epi       16 Jun   30 Jun
             Zhou, Dr Weigong     CDC, USA                                      Epi       14 May   14 Jun



             HONG KONG (CHINA)
             Name                 Organization, Country                    Area of work Start date End date
             Bresee, Joseph       CDC, USA                                      Epi       20 Mar   30 Apr
             Brewster,            Independed consultant, Australia              Epi        7 Apr   10 Apr
             Halijah Mokak                                                                24 Apr   30 Jun
             Buchholz, Dr Udo                                                   Epi       9 Apr     3 May
             Cocksedge, Dr Sandy WHO Headquarters, Switzerland                 Inf C      23 Apr   26 Apr
             Feldman, Heinrich    Health Canada, Canada                        Lab        26 Apr   16 May
             Flick, Ramon         Health Canada, Canada                        Lab        26 Apr   16 May
             Fukuda, Dr Keiji     CDC, USA                                      Epi       10 Mar   26 Mar
             Grolla, Allen        Health Canada, Canada                        Lab        26 Apr   16 May
             Lee, Dr Chin-Kei     Australian National University, Australia     Epi       17 Mar    5 May
             Li, Siu Mee Janet    Department of Health and Ageing, Australia    Epi       24 Mar   24 Apr
             McNiece, Kay         Department of Health and Ageing, Australia   Com        25 Apr   24 May
             Mock, Philip         CDC, USA                                     Com        18 Mar   17 Apr
             Moren, Alain         Institut de Veille Sanitaire, France          Epi       25 Apr   23 May
             Murphy, Dr Cathryn   NSW Department of Health, Australia          Inf C      4 May    10 May
             Nakashima,           Oita University, Japan                        Epi       7 Apr    19 Apr
             Dr Kazutoshi
             Pappas, Tony         WHO Headquarters, Switzerland                Com       19 May    26 May
             Schnitzler, Johannes Robert Koch Institute, Germany                Epi       28 Apr   30 May



      SARS: How a global
272   epidemic was stopped
Sleigh,               National Centre for Epidemiology and             Epi       11 Jun    12 Jul
Dr Adrian Charles     Population Health,
                      Australian National University, Australia
Sunagawa,             National Institute of Infectious Diseases,       Epi       18 Mar   17 Apr
Dr Tomimasa           Japan
Tilgner, Immo         Health Canada, Canada                            Epi       26 Apr   16 May
Treadwell, Tracee     CDC, USA                                         Epi       7 Apr     7 May
Uggowitzer, Steve     WHO Headquarters, Switzerland                   Com       20 May    26 May
Wang, Dr Julie Yung                                                    Epi       9 Apr    21 May



MACAO (CHINA)
Name                  Organization, Country                       Area of work Start date End date
Murphy, Dr Cathryn    NSW Department of Health, Australia             Inf C      1 May     4 May
Morita, Koichi        Nagasaki University, Japan                       Epi



TAIWAN, CHINA
Name                  Organization, Country                       Area of work Start date End date
Barwick, Rachel       CDC, USA
Bell, Michael         CDC, USA
Bloland, Dr Peter     CDC, USA                                         Epi      13 May     6 Jun
Burlack, Paul         CDC, USA
Burr, Gregory         CDC, USA
Chang, Soju           CDC, USA
Collins, Amy          CDC, USA
Dowell, Dr Scott      IEIP, CDC, Thailand                              Epi       16 Mar   23 Mar
Esswein, Eric         CDC, USA                                                  17 May     2 Jun
Factor, Stephanie     CDC, USA
Fisk, Tamara          IEIP, CDC, Thailand                             Inf C      25 Mar   15 Apr
Greim, Bill           CDC, USA
Jernigan, Dan         CDC, USA
Kamara,               WHO Headquarters, Switzerland                    Epi       19 Jun    7 Jul
Kande-Bure O’Bai
Kaydos-Daniels,       CDC, USA                                        Inf C     25 May    26 Jun
Susan
Keifer, Max           CDC, USA
Lando, Jim            CDC, USA
Macedo de Oliveira,   CDC, USA
Alexandre
Maloney, Susan        CDC, USA                                         Epi      24 May    17 Jun




                                                                                                     273
             Marx, Melissa        CDC
             Olowokure,           WHO Headquarters, Switzerland                    Epi       25 May    22 Jun
             Babatunde
             Olsen, Sonja         IEIP, CDC, Thailand                              Epi       16 Mar     4 Apr
                                                                                             20 Apr    24 Apr
             Park, Ben            CDC, USA
             Park, Dr Sarah       CDC, USA                                         Epi       25 May    27 Jun
             Richards, Chelsey    CDC, USA
             Roth, Dr Cathy       WHO Headquarters, Switzerland                    Epi       2 May    31 May
             Shay, David          CDC, USA
             Shieh, Wun-Ju        CDC, USA                                        Inf C      6 Jun     15 Jun
             Simmerman, Dr Mark CDC/Thailand-Ministry of Public Health            Inf C      25 Apr    9 May
             Sobel, Howard        WHO Headquarters, Switzerland                    Epi       23 May   21 Jun
             Wallingford, Kenneth CDC, USA                                                   28 Apr   12 May
             Wang, Susan          CDC, USA                                         Epi       3 Jun      2 Jul
             Watson, John         CDC, USA
             Wong, Dr David       CDC, USA
             Wong, Dr William     CDC, USA



             THE LAO PEOPLE’S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
             Name                 Position and/or organization                Area of work Start date End date
             Chojnacki,           Independent consultant,                         Inf C      3 Apr     4 Jul
             Astrid Laydia        Lao People’s Democratic Republic
             Clayton, Penelope                                                    Inf C      13 May    13 Jun
             Dowell, Dr Scott     IEIP, CDC, Thailand                              Epi       3 Apr     4 Apr
             Neu, Ingo                                                             Epi       18 May
             Senaratana, Wilawan Thailand                                         Inf C      7 Apr     24 Apr
             Simmerman, Dr Mark   IEIP, CDC, Thailand                             Inf C      3 Apr     5 Apr
             Van Frachen,                                                         Inf C      8 Apr    30 May
             Veronique


             MALAYSIA
             Name                 Organization, Country                       Area of work Start date End date
             Patel,               Australian National University, Australia        Epi       20 Jun    24 Jun
             Dr Mahomed Said




      SARS: How a global
274   epidemic was stopped
MONGOLIA
Name                   Organization, Country                      Area of work Start date End date
Gresser, Norbert                                                      Inf C      23 Apr   18 May
Hagan, Dr Robert       WHO Representative in Mongolia                  CO        12 Apr
Rojanapithayakorn,     WHO, Mongolia                                   CO        12 Apr
Dr Wiwat



THE PHILIPPINES
Name                   Organization, Country                      Area of work Start date End date
Brown, Sally E.                                                       Inf C      26 Apr    7 Jun
Burr, Jodie Michelle   Women’s and Children’s Hospital,               Inf C      26 Apr    5 Jun
                       Australia
De Main, Yvonne                                                       Inf C      10 May    20 Jul
Harrington,            Infection Control and Hospital                 Inf C      26 Apr   17 Jun
Glenys Ann             Epidemiology Unit, The Alfred, Australia
Mansoor,               WHO, Western Pacific Regional Office,           Epi       2 May    30 Jun
Dr Osman David         Philippines
Marano, Nina           CDC, USA                                       Inf C      4 Jun     3 Jul
Murphy, Dr Cathryn     NSW Department of Health, Australia            Inf C     27 Apr     1 May
                                                                                14 May     6 Jun
Newman, Robert         CDC, USA                                        Epi       30 Apr   21 May
Noury, Dr Dominique France                                            Log       21 May    22-Aug
Olivé, Dr Jean Marc    WHO Representative in the Philippines          CO         12 Mar
Panlilio, Adelisa      CDC, USA                                       Inf C      30 Apr   21 May
Raghunathan,           CDC, USA                                        Epi       30 Apr   21 May
Dr Pratima
Takahashi, Dr Hiroshi Japan International                              Epi       18 Apr    9 May
                      Cooperation Agency, Japan



PACIFIC ISLAND COUNTRIES AND AREAS
Name                   Organization, Country                      Area of work Start date End date
Ewald,                 Australia                                       Epi      27 May    16 Jun
Dr Daniel Peter
Kitz, Dr Christa       Germany                                        Inf C     18 May    17 Jun
Pitman, Dr Catherine   Westmead Hospital and                          Lab        10 Apr   28 May
                       SDS Pathology Sydney, Australia
Zimmerman,             Ryde Hospital and                              Inf C      23 Apr   18 Jun
Peta-Anne              Community Health Services,
                       Northern Sydney Health, Australia




                                                                                                     275
             PAPUA NEW GUINEA
             Name                     Organization, Country                   Area of work Start date End date
             Ewald, Dr Daniel Peter                                                Epi      27 May    16 Jun
             Kitz, Dr Christa                                                     Inf C     18 May    17 Jun



             SINGAPORE
             Name                     Organization, Country                   Area of work Start date End date
             Erickson, Bobbie Rae CDC, USA                                        Lab        27 Apr   20 May
             Kamara,             WHO Headquarters, Switzerland                     Epi      26 May    19 Jun
             Dr Kande-Bure O’Bai
             Khan, Ali                CDC, USA                                     Epi       9 Apr    16 May
             Lambert, Dr Stephen Murdoch Children’s Research Institute,            Epi       11 Apr   24 May
                                 Royal Children’s Hospital and
                                 University of Melbourne, Australia
             Mansoor,                 WHO, Western Pacific Regional Office,        Epi       21 Mar   12 Apr
             Dr Osman David           Philippines
             Murphy, Dr Cathryn       NSW Department of Health, Australia         Inf C     17 Apr    27 Apr
                                                                                            10 May    14 May
             Rosen, Daniel            CDC, USA                                     Epi       7 Apr     7 May
             Rotz, Lisa               CDC, USA                                     Epi       2 Jun    17 Jun
             Shindo, Nikki            WHO Headquarters, Switzerland                Epi      25 May    20 Jun



             VIET NAM
             Name                     Organization, Country                   Area of work Start date End date
             Aagesen, Dr Jesper Ryhov County Hospital,                            Inf C      14 Mar   25 Apr
                                 Jonkoping, Sweden
             Anh, Bach Huy            Ha Noi Medical University, Viet Nam          Epi       20 Mar   21 May
             Bausch, Dr Dan           CDC, USA                                     Epi       27 Mar   18 Apr
             Bloom, Dr Sharon         CDC, USA                                     Epi       7 Apr    30 May
             Brudon, Pascale          WHO Representative in Viet Nam               CO        3 Mar
             Chiarello, Linda         CDC, USA                                    Inf C      15 Mar   25 Mar
             Depoorte, Dr Evelyn Médecins Sans Frontières                          Epi       18 Mar   26 Mar
             Doran, Dr Rodger         WHO, Viet Nam                                CO        10 Feb
             Hien, Nguyen Quang                                                    Epi       23 Mar    6 May
             Horby, Peter             PHLS Communicable Disease                    Epi       5 Apr     2 May
                                      Surveillance Centre, United Kingdom
             Hummel, Justin           Médecins Sans Frontières                               2 Apr    30 Apr
             Josse, Dr Evelyne        Médecins Sans Frontières                    Psyc       1 Apr    20 Apr
             Leitmeyer, Dr Katrin     WHO Headquarters, Switzerland                Epi       12 Mar   17 May
             Maloney, Dr Susan        CDC, USA                                     Epi       17 Mar   28 Mar



      SARS: How a global
276   epidemic was stopped
Miller, Dr Megge       Department of Health and Ageing, Australia Epi         4 Apr    19 May
Montgomery, Dr Joel CDC, USA                                         Epi      26 Mar   18 Apr
Nicholson,             Leicester Medical School, United Kingdom     Inf C     14 Mar   24 Mar
Professor Karl
Oshitani, Dr Hitoshi   WHO, Western Pacific Regional Office,         Epi      10 Mar   18 Mar
                       Philippines
Paquet,                Institut de Veille Sanitaire, France          Epi      14 Mar   27 Mar
Dr Christopher
Plant,                 Curtin University of Technology, Australia   Inf C     15 Mar   30 May
Professor Aileen
Reynolds, Dr Mary      CDC, USA                                      Epi      15 Mar    5 Apr
Ronnevig,              Médecins Sans Frontières                     Inf C     31 Mar   29 Apr
Hege Helene
Sermand, Dan           Médecins Sans Frontières                               31 Mar   29 Apr
Shah,                  CDC, USA                                      Epi      8 Apr     8 May
Dr Jhankhana Jina
Shieh, Wun-Ju          CDC, USA                                     Inf C     13 Mar   23 Mar
Thomson, Peter         Médecins Sans Frontières                     Inf C     22 Mar      ?
Urbani, Dr Carlo       WHO, Viet Nam                                 CO       28 Feb   11 Mar
Uyeki, Dr Timothy      CDC, USA                                      Epi      9 Mar     8 Apr
Viatour, Marianne      Médecins Sans Frontières                     Admin     2 Apr     1 May
Wildau,              Médecins Sans Frontières                        Epi      9 Apr     5 May
Dr Huberta Lindeiner



WHO REGIONAL OFFICE                          FOR THE          WESTERN PACIFIC
Name                   Organization, Country                   Area of work Start date End date
Antkowiak, Wayne       WHO, Western Pacific Regional Office,        Log       12 Mar   15 Jun
                       Philippines
Atkinson, James        Independent Consultant, United Kingdom        Log     24 May     2 Nov
Bell, Dr David         WHO, Western Pacific Regional Office,        Log       10 Mar    1 May
                       Philippines
Christophel,           WHO, Western Pacific Regional Office,         Epi      23 Feb   18 Jun
Eva Maria              Philippines
Clayton, Penelope                                                   Inf C    13 May    13 Jun
Condon, Dr Robert      WHO, Western Pacific Regional Office,         Epi      12 Mar   19 Jun
                       Philippines
Cordingley, Peter      WHO, Western Pacific Regional Office,        Com       12 Mar
                       Philippines
Cullen, Michele                                                     Inf C     1 Apr     7 Jun
Doberstyn, Dr Brian    WHO, Western Pacific Regional Office,                  10 Feb
                       Philippines
Kaku, Dr Mitsuo        Tohoku University, Japan                     Inf C     3 Apr    13 Apr




                                                                                                  277
             Kasai, Takeshi         WHO, Western Pacific Regional Office,         Lab      12 Mar   30 Jun
                                    Philippines
             Kojima, Dr Kazunobu Sapporo Medical University, Japan                Lab      9 Apr    29 Apr
             Lambert, Dr Stephen Murdoch Children’s Research Institute,            Epi     24 Mar   10 Apr
                                 Royal Children’s Hospital and
                                 University of Melbourne, Australia
             Libraty, Dr Daniel     USA                                           Lab      16 May   23 Jun
             Miranda, Dr Elizabeth WHO, Western Pacific Regional Office,           Vet     10 Feb
                                   Philippines
             Muller, Dr Rosanne     National Centre for Epidemiology and         Epi       9 Apr    7 Jun
                                    Population Health,
                                    Australian National University, Australia
                                    Centre for Disease Control, Darwin, Australia
             Oshitani, Dr Hitoshi   WHO, Western Pacific Regional Office,          Epi     10 Feb
                                    Philippines
             Pappas, Tony           WHO Headquarters, Switzerland                 Com      4 Jun    11 Jun
             Patel,                 Australian National University, Australia      Epi     1 May    10 Jun
             Dr Mahomed Said
             Roces,              Oak Ridge Institute for Science and               Epi     27 Mar   15 Apr
             Dr Maria Concepcion Education (ORISE), CDC, Philippines
             Saito, Dr Reiko        Niigata University, Japan                      Epi     29 Apr   27 May
             Sato, Yoshikuni        WHO, Western Pacific Regional Office,        Funding   22 Feb
                                    Philippines
             Senaratana, Wilawan Thailand                                         Inf C    7 Apr    24 Apr
             Shimada, Dr Yasushi Field Epidemiology Training Programme,            Epi     7 May    7 Jun
                                 National Institute of Infectious Diseases,
                                 Japan
             Spencer, Dr Jenean     Department of Health and Ageing, Australia     Epi     13 Jun   13 Aug
             Suzuki, Dr Akira       Sendai National Hospital, Japan                Epi     2 Jun    1 Aug
             Suzuki, Dr Satowa                                                     Epi     23 Mar   24 Apr
             Tanaka, Hiroko         WHO, Western Pacific Regional Office,                  12 Mar   31 May
                                    Philippines
             Uggowitzer, Steve      WHO Headquarters, Switzerland                 Com      4 Jun    11 Jun
             Vanquaille, Peter      Independent consultant                        Log      7 Apr    27 May
             Witt, Dr Clara         Walter Reed Army Institute of Research,        Epi     3 May    20 May
                                    USA
             Yoshida, Dr Hideki     National Institute of Infectious Diseases,     Epi     16 Apr   11 May
                                    Japan




      SARS: How a global
278   epidemic was stopped
WHO HEADQUARTERS
CONSULTANTS
Name                    Organization, Country                  Area of work Start date End date
Gay, Nigel              Technical Adviser, Health Protection                       24 Apr   2 Aug
                        Agency, United Kingdom
Martin, Steve           European Programme for                                     6 Apr    30 May
                        Interventional Epidemiology Training



COMMUNICABLE DISEASES, DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICABLE DISEASE
SURVEILLANCE AND RESPONSE (CDS/CSR)
Ait-Ikhlef, Kamel                Formenty, Pierre                Preaud, Claire
Anderson, Ruth                   Grein, Thomas                   Rashford, Adrienne
Andraghetti, Roberta             Hardy, Derek                    Roth, Cathy
Anker, Martha                    Jenkins, P.G.                   Rodier, Guénaël
Bauquerez, Rachel                Jesuthasan, Emmanuel            Shindo, Nikki
Breugelmans, Gabriele            Leitmeyer, Katrin               Sobel, Howard
Buriot, Diego                    Lièvre, Maja                    Stöhr, Klaus
Carnicer-Pont, Dolors            Merianos, Angela                Thomson, Gail
Chaieb, Amina                    Lorenzin, Eglé                  Wilson, Williamina
Cocksedge, William               Luy, Marie                      Umali, Khristeen
Costa, Ntanis (Danis)            Mathiot, Christian              Vandemaele, Kaat
Creese, Peggy                    O’Bai Kamara, Kande-Bure        Valenciano, Marta
Drury, Patrick                   Olowokure, Babatunde            van Rossum, Koen
Emami, Reza                      O’Rourke, Suzanne               Werker, Denise
Fitzner, Julia                   Poncé, Corrine                  Youssef, Mohammad



COMMUNICABLE DISEASES, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR’S OFFICE (EXD)
Block Tyrrell, Sue               Karahasanovic, Edin             Thompson, Dick
Cheng, Maria                     Kindhauser, Mary Kay            Tissot, Patrick
Guilloux, Anne




                                                                                                     279
             COMMUNICABLE DISEASES, MANAGEMENT SUPPORT UNIT (MSU)
             Meloni, Jill               Pievaroli, Liliana                Tantillo, Chris
             Pappas, Tony               Swanson, Michael



             OTHER DEPARTMENTS
             Name                       Department
             Keiny, M.P.                Health Technologies and Pharmaceuticals (HTP),
                                        UNAIDS/WHO Research on Viral Vaccines (VABI/IVR)
             Esparza, Jose              HTP/VAB/IVR/VIR
             Bartram, James             Sustainable Development and Healthy Environments (SDE),
                                        Protection of the Human Environment (PHE),
                                        Water, Sanitation and Health (WSH)
             Carr, Richard              SDE/PHE/WSH
             Bos, Robert                SDE/PHE/WSH



             OTHER WHO               REGIONAL AND COUNTRY OFFICES
             Name                       Office
             Gudjon Magnusson           Regional Office for Europe
             Desiree Kogevinas          Regional Office for Europe
             B. Ganter                  Regional Office for Europe
             Arun Ratnam                Regional Office for South-East Asia
             Shipra Sharma              Regional Office for South-East Asia
             David Wheeler              Regional Office for South-East Asia
             Parmod Kapur               Regional Office for South-East Asia
             Kumara Rai                 Regional Office for South-East Asia
             Duangvadee Sungkhobol      Regional Office for South-East Asia
             Harsaran Pandey            Regional Office for South-East Asia
             Alex Andjaparidze          Representative Office, the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste
             Sampath K Krishnan         Representative Office, India
             S. J. Habayeb              Representative Office, India
             Leonard Ortega             Representative Office, Myanmar
             Marla Win                  Representative Office, Myanmar
             Mi Mi That                 Representative Office, Myanmar
             Patrick Wunna Htoo         Representative Office, Myanmar
             Somchai Peerapakorn        Representative Office, Thailand
             Bjorn Melgaard             Representative Office, Thailand
             Richard Kalina             Representative Office, Thailand
             Martin Eichel              Representative Office, Thailand
             Mary Pinder                Representative Office, Thailand


      SARS: How a global
280   epidemic was stopped
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


AUTHORS
   The principal writers of this report were Carolyn Abraham, Mangai
Balasegaram, Mary Ann Benitez, Pascale Brudon, Maria Cheng, Dr Robert
Condon, Dr Brian Doberstyn, Dr Christian Drosten, Dr Andrea Ellis, Dr Yi Guan,
Dr David Heymann, Dr Marie-Paule Kieny, Mary Kay Kindhauser, Dr Stephen
Lambert, Dr Katrin Leitmeyer, Professor John S Mackenzie, Dr Susan Maloney,
Dr Osman David Mansoor, Dr Angela Merianos, Dr Elizabeth Miranda,
Dr Rosanne Muller, Dr Jean-Marc Olivé, Dr Babatunde Olowokure, Dr Saladin
Osmanov, Dr Mahomed Patel, Dr Malik Peiris, Professor Aileen Plant, Dr Leo
Poon, Dr Guénaël Rodier, Dr Wiwat Rojanapithayakorn, Dr Cathy Roth,
Professor Linda Saif, Professor Joseph Jao-Yiu Sung, and Floyd Whaley.


CONTRIBUTORS
   Contributions were gratefully received from James Atkinson, Dr David Bell,
Dr Robert Breiman, Oliver Cattin, Serge Dumont, Dr Heinz Feldmann, Troy
Gepte, Allen Grolla, Mei-Shang Ho, Josh Jones, Peter King, John Leung, Dr Li
Ailan, Dr Jamsran Mendsaihan, Dr Megge Miller, Ingo Neu, Sonja Olsen, Dr
Sarah Park, Professor Aileen Plant, Doris Radun, Alan Schnur, Vu Hoag Thu,
Immo Tilgner, Dr Timothy Uyeki, Peter Vanquaille, Denise Werker, and Peta-
Anne Zimmerman.


PEER REVIEWERS
   Valuable input was received from the following experts who reviewed the
science chapters: Dr Ralf Altmeyer, Pasteur Institute, Hong Kong; Dr Larry
Anderson, CDC, USA; Richard Bellamy; Dounia Bitar, l'Institut de Veille Sanitare,
France; Mike Catton, Victorian Infections Diseases Reference Laboratory,
Australia; Dr Mary Chu, WHO, Switzerland, Paul Garner, Liverpool School of
Tropical Medicine, The University of Liverpool, United Kingdom; Matthias
Niedrig, Robert Koch Institut, Germany; Janusz Paweska, National Institute for
Communicable Diseases, South Africa; Dr Susan Poutanen, Toronto Medical
Laboratories & Mount Sinai Hospital, Canada; Professor Linda Saif, Ohio
Agricultural Research and Development Center, The Ohio State University, USA;



                                                                      SARS: How a global
                                                                     epidemic was stopped   281
             Lauren Stockman, CDC, USA; Sylvie van der Werf, l'Institut Pasteur, France;
             Dr Linfa Wang, Australian Animal Health Laboratory, Australia; and Denise
             Werker, WHO, Switzerland.


             EDITORIAL TEAM
                Editorial support was provided by Mary Ann Asico, Peter Cordingley, Alastair
             Dingwall, Dr Brian Doberstyn, Dr Osman David Mansoor, Dr Hitoshi Oshitani
             and Rhonda Vandeworp. Design by Alan Esquillon. Layout by Bhoie Hernandez
             and Grace Yu. Index by Indexing Specialists (UK) Ltd.


             PICTURE CREDITS
                Cover page, pp. 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, Alan Esquillon; p. 19, Dr Aiee Ling,
             Virology Unit, Singapore General Hospital; pp. 23, 29, 76, 81, 87, 89, 92,
             142, 155, 157, Christian Keenan, Getty Images; pp. 24, 170 (bottom), Hanne
             Strandgaardh, WHO; pp. 34, 42, 50 (bottom), 51, 53, 79, 159, Pierre Virot,
             WHO; pp. 40, 56, Jay Directo, AFP, Getty Images; p. 41, JP Moczulski, AFP,
             Getty Images; p. 44, Jimin Lai, AFP, Getty Images; pp. 45, 82, 136, STR, AFP,
             Getty Images; p. 46, Liu Jin, AFP, Getty Images; p. 50 (top), Sam Yeh, AFP,
             Getty Images; p. 59, Dr Jenean Spencer and Steve Uggowitzer; p. 74, Peter
             Parks, AFP, Getty Images; p. 77, Frederic J Brown, AFP, Getty Images; p. 78,
             provided by Dr Robert Breiman; p. 80, Dr Johan Giesecke; p. 84, AFP, Getty
             Images; p. 91, Jean-Pierre Clatot, AFP, Getty Images; p. 95, Dr Joel Montgomery;
             p. 96, provided by Dr Sharon Bloom; p. 98, Dr Dan Bausch; pp. 99, 100, 170
             (top) Hoang Dinh Nam, AFP, Getty Images; pp. 102, 105, 164 (bottom), Luis
             Ascui, Getty Images; pp. 106, 164 (top), 165, Roslan Rahman, AFP, Getty Images;
             pp. 110, 113 (top left), Sam Yeh, AFP, Getty Images; pp. 111, 113 (top right),
             Patrick Lin, AFP, Getty Images; p. 113 (bottom), provided by Dr Sarah Park,
             CDC; p. 117, provided by Dr Jean-Marc Olivé; p. 120, Penelope Clayton; pp.
             121, 225, Richard A Brooks, AFP, Getty Images; pp. 122, 123, 125, Norbert
             Gresser; p. 128, Fred Lum, The Globe and Mail; p. 131, Louie Palu, The Globe
             and Mail; p. 153, Paula Bronstein, Getty Images; p. 158, Robert Ng, South
             China Morning Post; p. 171, Dr Carlo Urbani, WHO; p. 227, Katharina Hesse,
             Getty Images.




      SARS: How a global
282   epidemic was stopped
                  ABOUT THE
                   AUTHORS


   Carolyn Abraham is an award-winning author and medical reporter for The
Globe and Mail, Canada's national daily newspaper. She has won numerous
prizes for her coverage of medical issues and covered Toronto's SARS outbreak
from its beginning. At its end, Ms Abraham actually delivered her baby in a
Toronto hospital under quarantine.

   Mangai Balasegaram is a freelance writer who, for the past four years, has
worked on public information for WHO in the Western Pacific Region, including
WHO China office during the SARS outbreak. She began her career as a journalist,
specializing in HIV/AIDS, and has won several awards and fellowships.

  Mary Ann Benitez is a medical reporter for the South China Morning Post in
Hong Kong. She has been a Hong Kong-based journalist for many years and a
member of the "4.30 Club"-the core group attending the daily press briefings on
SARS presided by government and hospital authority officials in Hong Kong.

   Pascale Brudon was the WHO Representative in Viet Nam during the SARS
outbreak. She received Viet Nam's "Medal for People's Health" for her work
and the work of the WHO country office. She is currently Task Manager, General
Programme of Work, at WHO Headquarters in Geneva.

  Maria Cheng was a journalist in Hong Kong. She joined WHO as a
communications officer in Geneva during the SARS outbreak.

    Rob Condon is a public health physician in Suva, Fiji. During the outbreak,
he was seconded from WHO South Pacific office (where he was responsible for
Communicable Disease Surveillance and Response) to lead the response group
of the SARS team.

   Brian Doberstyn was Director of the Division for Combating Communicable
Disease in the WHO Western Pacific Regional Office during the SARS outbreak.



                                                                     SARS: How a global
                                                                    epidemic was stopped   283
                Christian Drosten is Head of the Molecular Diagnostics laboratory group,
             Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, Hamburg, Germany. His
             laboratory identified SARS-CoV from a sample of a patient who imported SARS
             into Germany and developed the first real-time RT-PCR test, which was made
             available as a diagnostic kit during the epidemic.

                 Andrea Ellis has been a senior epidemiologist for the Government of Canada
             for just over 10 years. She is currently the head of the Outbreak Response Section
             of the Foodborne, Waterborne and Zoonotic Infections Division at the Public
             Health Agency of Canada. Dr Ellis spent two years on secondment to WHO's
             Department of Communicable Disease Surveillance and Response in Geneva.
             There she provided training in disease surveillance and outbreak response and
             was involved in the response to the SARS and avian influenza outbreaks.

                Yi Guan is a virologist and an associate professor in the Department of
             Microbiology at the University of Hong Kong. As a principal investigator, he
             identified animal reservoirs of SARS in southern China and helped the Chinese
             Government to avert the second SARS outbreak in early 2004.

               David L. Heymann was Executive Director of Communicable Diseases at
             WHO Headquarters in Geneva from 1998 to 2004.

                Marie-Paule Kieny is Director of the Initiative for Vaccine Research at WHO
             Headquarters in Geneva. She has spent most of her career working on the
             development of various human or veterinary vaccines.

                Mary Kay Kindhauser is a science writer in the Communicable Diseases cluster
             at WHO Headquarters. She prepared the daily web updates during the SARS
             outbreak.

                 Stephen Lambert is a public health physician and senior research fellow at
             the Vaccine & Immunisation Research Group, Murdoch Children's Research
             Institute and School of Population Health, University of Melbourne. During the
             SARS outbreak, he worked in the WHO Regional Office and then in Singapore
             as a team leader.

                Katrin Leitmeyer is a scientist at Robert Koch Institute in Berlin, Germany.
             She is a former WHO Headquarters staff member who was assigned to Viet
             Nam during the SARS outbreak. She is a physician with public health training
             in infectious-disease epidemiology; specialized in clinical, laboratory, and
             epidemiological management of hemorrhagic fever virus infections.



      SARS: How a global
284   epidemic was stopped
   John S Mackenzie is a Premier's fellow and Professor of Tropical Infectious
Diseases, Australian Biosecurity CRC, Curtin University of Technology, Perth,
Australia. He is a member of the Steering Committee of the Global Outbreak
Alert and Response Network (GOARN) and the WHO/CSR Strategic Advisory
Committee for Global Health Security. During the SARS outbreak, he led an
early WHO mission to China and worked in WHO Headquarters to establish
the SARS Research Advisory Group and the SARS verification laboratory network.

   Susan Maloney is a medical epidemiologist with the Division of Global
Migration and Quarantine, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
United States of America. She is a physician board-certified in both paediatrics
and infectious diseases, and has extensive public health experience in infectious
disease epidemiology and hospital and community infection control. During
the 2003 SARS outbreak, she was a member of the WHO team in Viet Nam and
Team Leader of the Taiwan CDC team.

   Osman David Mansoor is a public health physician working as a consultant
in New Zealand. He is a former WHO staff member (immunization unit in
Manila) posted to Singapore and then to the Philippines during the SARS
outbreak.

   Angela Merianos is a medical epidemiologist/public health physician, Alert
and Response Operations/Department of Communicable Disease Surveillance
and Response, WHO Headquarters. Chair of the WHO Ad Hoc Working Group
on the Epidemiology of SARS; and WHO SARS Disease Focal Point during the
outbreak and in the post outbreak period.

   Elizabeth Miranda was a field epidemiologist and a veterinary public health
specialist in the Department of Communicable Disease Surveillance and
Response, Regional Office for the Western Pacific, WHO, Manila.

   Rosanne Muller was an epidemiologist and public health medical officer,
based at the Centre for Disease Control in Darwin, Australia. During the SARS
outbreak, she worked on regional rumour surveillance at the WHO Western
Pacific Regional Office.

   Jean-Marc Olivé is the WHO Representative in the Philippines.

   Babatunde Olowokure is a Regional Epidemiologist, Regional Surveillance
Unit, Health Protection Agency (West Midlands), Birmingham, United Kingdom.
Formerly a WHO staff member, he worked on SARS as part of the Global Alert
and Response team in Geneva, and then was posted to Taiwan during the SARS
outbreak.

                                                                      SARS: How a global
                                                                     epidemic was stopped   285
                 Dr Saladin Osmanov is Coordinator ad interim, WHO-UNAIDS HIV Vaccine
             Initiative for Vaccine Research. He was responsible for organizing the WHO
             consultation on "Needs and Opportunities for SARS Vaccine Research and
             Development", 31 October-1 November 2003, in Geneva, Switzerland.

                 Mahomed Patel is an epidemiologist and public-health physician at the
             National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health, Australian National
             University. During the SARS outbreak, he was the Team Leader for Preparedness
             at the Regional Office in Manila and a team member for evaluating responses in
             China and Malaysia.

                 Malik Peiris is a professor in the Department of Microbiology at the University
             of Hong Kong and Chief of Virology at Queen Mary Hospital. He was involved
             in the discovery of the aetiological agent of SARS.

                Aileen Plant is a professor of international health at the Australian Biosecurity
             Cooperative Research Centre for Emerging Infectious Disease, Curtin University
             of Technology, Perth, Australia. She was a member of the Global Outbreak
             Alert and Response Network and was WHO Viet Nam team leader during SARS
             outbreak. She was the first person in the world with SARS on her business card
             and received Viet Nam's Medal for People's Health.

               Leo Poon is a molecular virologist at the LM Department of Microbiology,
             University of Hong Kong.

                Guénaël Rodier was Director, Department of Communicable Disease
             Surveillance and Response, WHO Headquarters.

                Wiwat Rojanapithayakorn is a WHO senior adviser in WHO China office.
             He was working as a medical officer in WHO Mongolia office during the SARS
             outbreak.

                 Linda Saif is a distinguished university professor and researcher with The
             Ohio State University's Food Animal Health Research Program of the Ohio
             Agricultural Research and Development Center (OARDC). Saif is known
             internationally for her work on enteric viruses, including rotaviruses, caliciviruses,
             and coronaviruses. During the SARS outbreak, Dr Saif acted as a scientific adviser
             to the SARS Scientific Advisory Group of WHO, and her laboratory became
             part of the SARS international laboratory network organized to fight the disease.
             She also was a member of an ad hoc SARS scientific advisory team for CDC.




      SARS: How a global
286   epidemic was stopped
   Joseph Jao-Yiu Sung is Chair of the Department of Medicine and Therapeutics
at The Chinese University of Hong Kong. He is also Associate Dean, Faculty of
Medicine; and Chief, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology. He is the
author of six books and numerous book chapters, peer-reviewed papers and
abstracts. He has won numerous awards, including Time magazine's Asian Heroes
2003 award for his work on SARS.

   Floyd Whaley is a journalist who has been based in Asia-in the Philippines
and in Thailand-since 1994. A former Special Correspondent for Reader's Digest
magazine, he has also contributed to The Los Angeles Times, The New York
Times, USA Today, Reuters News Service and many other publications. Currently,
he works in media relations for the Manila-based Asian Development Bank.




                                                                   SARS: How a global
                                                                  epidemic was stopped   287
                                  GLOSSARY
             Aerosol                      A collection of very small particles or liquid
                                          suspended in air. A virus in an aerosol can be
                                          transmitted trough the air without direct contact.
                                          This was rare for SARS.

             Aerosolization               The process of creating an aerosol. A SARS
                                          aerosol may have been created in the Amoy
                                          Gardens outbreak. Aerosols can also be
                                          produced during medical procedures, such as
                                          nebulization, tracheal suctioning, and
                                          intubation; however, there is no direct evidence
                                          that this happened during the care of a SARS
                                          patient.

             Aetiology                    The cause of a disease. The aetiology of SARS
                                          was at first unknown.

             Aetiological agent           The specific agent that causes disease. Koch’s
                                          postulates are used to establish the aetiological
                                          agent. For SARS, it was the SARS coronavirus.

             Affected area                An area in which local chain(s) of transmission
                                          of SARS is/are occurring as reported by the
                                          national public health authorities. WHO defined
                                          an area as affected for 20 days after the last local
                                          case was isolated, 20 days being two incubation
                                          periods, to ensure that there was no further
                                          transmission of cases that had not yet been
                                          reported. From 2 May, WHO replaced the term
                                          “affected area” with “area with recent local
                                          transmission”.

             Agent                        A factor, such as a microorganism, chemical
                                          substance, or form of radiation, whose presence,
                                          excessive presence, or (in deficiency diseases)
                                          relative absence is essential for the occurrence
                                          of a disease.

             Alanine transaminase (ALT)   An enzyme most commonly associated with the
                                          liver, although it is found in every cell. Elevated
                                          levels of ALT often suggest the existence of


      SARS: How a global
288   epidemic was stopped
                               medical problems. Mild elevation of ALT was
                               commonly found in SARS patients.

Alveoli (plural of alveolus)   Terminal air sacs in the lungs where gases are
                               exchanged. (The airtubes—bronchi and
                               bronchioles—connect the outside air to the
                               alveoli.) SARS damage in the lung was mostly at
                               alveolar surface.

Antigen                        A substance, often a protein, which stimulates
                               an antibody response specifically targeted
                               against it.

Asymptomatic                   “Without symptoms”. An asymptomatic case is
                               an infected person who has no symptoms of the
                               infection. Such cases of SARS were unusual.
                               Asymptomatic transmission does not appear to
                               have occurred in SARS.

Biopsy                         Medical procedure that removes a very small
                               piece of tissue for diagnostic procedures (e.g.
                               microscopic examination). The material from the
                               procedure is also called a biopsy.

Biosafety level (BSL)          There are four biosafety levels (BSL1 to BSL4)
                               that categorize the minimum requirements (of
                               work practices, safety equipment, and facilities)
                               for handling infectious agents of different risk.
                               BSL1 is for agents with no or low individual and
                               community risk, while BSL4 is for agents with
                               the highest risk.

Case                           An individual with a particular disease. A SARS
                               case is a person with SARS infection. A case can
                               be classified as suspect, probable, or confirmed
                               depending on contact history, clinical findings,
                               and laboratory tests and according to the case
                               definition. Defining who is and who is not a
                               case is fundamental for studying the
                               epidemiology of a disease.

Case definition                A set of standard criteria for deciding whether a
                               person has a particular disease or health-related
                               condition, by specifying clinical criteria and
                               limitations on time, place, and person.



                                                                     SARS: How a global
                                                                    epidemic was stopped   289
             Chain of transmission   Describes the spread of a virus (or other agent)
                                     as it passes from one person to the next (for a
                                     disease that spreads from person to person).
                                     Transmission of a disease is stopped when all
                                     the chains are interrupted.

             Close contact           In the context of SARS, “close contact” means
                                     having cared for or lived with someone with
                                     SARS or having direct contact with respiratory
                                     secretions or body fluids of a patient with SARS.
                                     Examples of close contact include kissing or
                                     hugging, sharing eating or drinking utensils,
                                     talking to someone within about one metre, and
                                     touching someone directly. Close contact does
                                     not include activities like walking by a person
                                     or briefly sitting across a waiting room or office.
                                     In practically all cases, “close contact” with a
                                     case was a prerequisite to be infected with SARS.

             Cluster                 An aggregation of cases of a disease. For a
                                     communicable disease, like SARS, a cluster is
                                     usually a group of cases directly or indirectly
                                     infected through a common exposure (person,
                                     place, or time). A cluster describes a group of
                                     cases that share epidemiological features—
                                     usually a group of cases that are closely grouped
                                     in time and place. A cluster can also be
                                     described as an outbreak, but the link between
                                     cases in a cluster is usually closer than that in an
                                     outbreak.

             Contagious              Can be used to describe a disease or a person. It
                                     describes a disease as spreading from one person
                                     to another. It describes the stage or duration of
                                     the disease in a person when they can infect
                                     another person. Technically, contagious has the
                                     same meaning as infectious, but may be more
                                     emotive.

             Coronavirus             A group of viruses that have a halo or crown-
                                     like (corona) appearance when viewed under
                                     an electron microscope. These viruses are a
                                     common cause of mild to moderate upper-
                                     respiratory illness in humans and are associated


      SARS: How a global
290   epidemic was stopped
                 with respiratory, gastrointestinal, liver, and
                 neurologic diseases in animals. The SARS
                 coronavirus is a new member of the coronavirus
                 family.

Corticosteroid   A drug that suppress inflammation by mimicking
                 the effect of a hormone that the body produces.
                 It remains uncertain if corticosteroids have a
                 beneficial impact on SARS.

Cytokine         A substance, usually a protein, which is
                 produced by cells and sends chemical messages
                 to other cells. These messages are the mediators
                 of the body’s inflammatory and immune
                 response.

Droplet spread   SARS spread from person to person
                 predominantly by droplet (as opposed to aerosol)
                 spread. A droplet is too large to remain
                 suspended in air. Infected droplets that are
                 spread by talking, coughing, or sneezing can
                 travel only a short distance (usually less than
                 one metre), which is why close contact was
                 usually needed for SARS transmission. Droplets
                 can also be spread by hand or through fomites
                 (inanimate objects that have had contact with
                 contaminated body secretions). A droplet can
                 be aerosolized (suspended in air) by medical
                 procedures such as tracheal suctioning,
                 intubation, and nebulization.

Epidemic         The occurrence of more cases of disease than
                 expected in a given area or among a specific
                 group of people over a particular period of time.
                 Technically, has the same meaning as an
                 outbreak. For infectious diseases like SARS, it
                 implies the introduction and spread of the
                 pathogen in a way that had not previously
                 happened.

Epidemic curve   A graphical representation of the spread of the
                 epidemic. This is usually shown by preparing a
                 bar or line graph of the number of cases by time
                 of onset. The pattern of the epidemic curve is a



                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                      epidemic was stopped   291
                                             basic epidemiological tool that is used to help
                                             define the cause and control of an epidemic

             Epidemiology                    The study of the distribution (time, place, person)
                                             and determinants of disease, i.e. who gets the
                                             disease and why, so that appropriate control
                                             measures can be developed.

             Epithelium (epithelial cells)   The outer lining of body surfaces (e.g. skin, gut,
                                             lung), which is composed of epithelial cells.
                                             Each body surface has its own special type of
                                             epithelial cells.

             Fibrosis                        The formation of fibrous tissue, which is
                                             histologically different than the original tissue,
                                             resulting from a disease process.

             Genome                          The genetic information of an organism.

             Human leucocyte antigen         A protein on the surface of white blood cells
                                             that provides a genetic fingerprint and can be a
                                             marker for disease susceptibility in some diseases.

             Host                            A person or other living organism that can be
                                             infected by an infectious agent under natural
                                             conditions.

             IgG / IgA / IgM                 Different type of antibodies (immunoglobulins)
                                             produced by the immune system. Each one has
                                             a slightly different function, and antibody tests
                                             are usually directed at one or more of that type.

             In vitro                        “In glass”. A test undertaken in the laboratory as
                                             opposed to in living organisms (in vivo).

             In vivo                         “In life”. A test undertaken in a living organism
                                             as opposed to in a laboratory (in vitro).

             Incubation period               Time from infection (exposure to the infectious
                                             agent) to the first manifestation of the disease it
                                             causes.

             Index case                      For a disease with person-to-person transmission,
                                             the index case is the source of a cluster or
                                             outbreak. He or she is the first person in the
                                             cluster or outbreak to become infected.




      SARS: How a global
292   epidemic was stopped
                       Identifying the index case helps to identify the
                       chains of transmission and how the disease is
                       spread.

Infection              What happens when an infectious agent gets
                       past the body’s defences and takes hold. There
                       are many kinds of infection. SARS produced
                       what is called an “acute infection”, meaning that
                       infection led to disease soon after exposure (with
                       a relatively short incubation period). As with
                       other infections, the symptoms of SARS infection
                       result not only from the presence of the virus in
                       the body, but also from the body’s efforts to fight
                       off the virus. Fever, for example, is a symptom
                       caused by the body attempting to destroy the
                       pathogen.

International Health   The International Health Regulations (IHRs),
Regulations            which are administered by the World Health
                       Organization, are the only legally binding
                       international instrument covering measures for
                       preventing the transboundary spread of
                       infectious diseases. They provide a single code
                       of procedures and practices, including routine
                       measures at airports and seaports, for preventing
                       the importation of pathogens and vectors. They
                       also set out roles and responsibilities, for WHO
                       as well as for individual countries, for
                       responding to a limited range of disease
                       outbreaks. They contribute greatly to the use of
                       uniform and effective protective measures both
                       on a routine basis and in certain crisis situations.

Koch’s postulates      These postulates specify that to establish an
                       organism as the pathogen for that disease: (1)
                       the organism is found in all cases but not in
                       healthy people; and (2) the organism when
                       inoculated into a healthy subject causes the same
                       disease. (Koch was a 19th-century German
                       physician.)

Lymphocyte             A type of white blood cell responsible for the
                       body’s immune system. The two main types of



                                                               SARS: How a global
                                                              epidemic was stopped   293
                                         lymphocytes are B cells (produce antibodies)
                                         and T cells (provide humoral immunity).

             Lymphopaenia                A reduction in the number of lymphocytes in
                                         the blood. (a common finding in SARS).

             Neutralizing antibody       An antibody that can inhibit the growth of a virus
                                         (or other infectious agent) from causing
                                         infection.

             Nosocomial infection        Hospital-acquired infection.

             Oedema                      Abnormal, excess fluid that collects in the space
                                         between the cells in one or more parts of the
                                         body as a result of a systemic or local disease
                                         process.

             Outbreak                    The technical definitions of outbreak and
                                         epidemic are the same, but the term outbreak
                                         emotes a more ‘neutral’ description of the event.
                                         A cluster can also be described as an outbreak.

             Pandemic                    An epidemic occurring over a very wide area
                                         (several countries or continents) and usually
                                         affecting a large proportion of the population.

             Pathogen                    A virus, bacterium, fungus, parasite, or other
                                         type of microorganism that is the cause of that
                                         disease. (The SARS coronavirus is the pathogen
                                         that causes SARS.)

             Pathogenesis                Origin and development of disease.

             Polymerase chain reaction   A laboratory method for detecting the genetic
                                         material. The PCR test is a useful way of
                                         detecting infectious disease agents in specimens
                                         from patients, including SARS patients. The test
                                         involves making multiple copies of a small DNA
                                         fragment using the polymerase enzyme. In the
                                         case of RNA viruses such as SARS, the first step
                                         involves making a DNA copy of the RNA using
                                         the reverse transcriptase enzyme. Hence the test
                                         is called reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
                                         reaction (RT-PCR).

             Period of communicability   The period of time when a person infected with
                                         an agent can transmit it to others.


      SARS: How a global
294   epidemic was stopped
Prodrome (prodromal)           A symptom of a disease before it becomes fully
                               manifest.

Pulmonary                      Of the lung.

Sensitivity                    A test’s sensitivity is how accurately it picks up
                               all cases, or 1-false negative rate (see also
                               specificity).

Seroconversion                 Describes the situation where a person who did
                               not previously have the antibodies being
                               discussed develops them, i.e. “converts” from
                               having no antibodies (seronegative) to having
                               them (seropositve), which means that the person
                               was recently infected.

Serology                       The results of antibody tests. Following an
                               infection, the body makes antibodies against the
                               pathogen. Tests for the specific antibodies against
                               that pathogen can then show if there has been
                               that infection. Antibody tests are commonly used
                               to diagnose infectious disease, including SARS.

Seroprevalence                 Percentage of a population with the antibody
                               in question. It is a way of describing how
                               common an infection is or has been.

Serosurvey (serological survey)A survey of the blood of a population to measure
                               what proportion have the antibody in question.
                               This is used to test how common an infection is
                               in that community.

Serum                          The noncellular part of the blood where
                               antibodies are present. As testing of antibodies
                               is done on the serum (as opposed to whole
                               blood), antibody testing is also called serological
                               testing.

Specificity                    A test’s specificity is how accurately it rejects up
                               all non-cases, or 1-false positive rate (see also
                               sensitivity).

Super spreader                 A person who passes an infection to many more
                               people than the average. For nearly all SARS
                               cases, transmission was limited to less than three
                               other individuals. Only occasionally were the



                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   295
                                      numbers higher. Note: There is no precise
                                      numerical or statistical definition of how many
                                      cases make up a super spreader.

             Super-spreading event    An occurrence of many people being infected
                                      by an index case. A super-spreading event is not
                                      defined by a precise number of cases. However,
                                      in most events, about 20 or more people were
                                      infected.

             Syndrome                 A collection of clinical manifestations (signs,
                                      symptoms, laboratory results) that describe a
                                      specific clinical entity.

             Thrombocytopaenia        A reduction in the number of platelets in the
                                      blood (a common finding in SARS).

             Vaccine                  A substance that when given to a person protects
                                      against a specific infection. Vaccines are made
                                      from inactivated or modified pathogen, or some
                                      parts of it. If the person comes in contact with
                                      that pathogen, the body then fights it off easily
                                      and can protect against this disease in the future.
                                      This protection is called immunity.

             Viraemia                 The presence of virus in the blood.

             Virus                    A disease-causing microorganism that depends
                                      on a host cell to survive and reproduce. Unlike
                                      bacteria, which are larger, a virus needs to get
                                      inside a living cell and take over its machinery
                                      to reproduce. Once the virus has invaded a cell,
                                      it produces and releases copies of the virus,
                                      which go on to infect other cells.

             Zoonosis (pl zoonoses)   An infectious disease that is transmissible under
                                      natural conditions from animals to humans.




      SARS: How a global
296   epidemic was stopped
            ACRONYMS

ACE          angiotensin converting enzyme
ALT          alanine transaminase
ARDS         adult respiratory distress syndrome
BCoV         bovine coronavirus
BOOP         bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia
BSL          biosafety level
CDC          Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
             United States of America
China CDC    Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention
CT           computed tomography
EIA          enzyme immunoassays
ELISA        enzyme linked immunosorbent assay
FIPV         feline infectious peritonitis virus
GMP          good manufacturing practice
GOARN        Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network
GPHIN        Global Public Health Intelligence Network
HE           hemagglutinin-esterase
IBV          infectious bronchitis virus
ICU          intensive care unit
IFA          immunofluorescence assays
ILO          International Labour Organisation
IMP          index of myocardial performance
M            membrane
MR           magnetic resonance
N            nucleocapsid
NT           neutralization tests
ORF          open reading frame
PCR          polymerase chain reaction
PEDV         porcine epidemic diarrhoea virus
PRCV         porcine respiratory coronavirus
RT-PCR       reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
SARS         severe acute respiratory syndrome
SARS-CoV     severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
S            spike


                                                    SARS: How a global
                                                   epidemic was stopped   297
             TGEV            transmissible gastroenteritis virus
             WB              Western blot
             WHO             World Health Organization




      SARS: How a global
298   epidemic was stopped
                              INDEX
29-nucleotide sequence 211, 226           Bach Mai Hospital (Viet Nam) 96, 98
                                          Bangkok 152
AB, Ms 102, 104                           Baptist Hospital (Hong Kong) 88
AC, Mr 142, 145                           Barrier nursing training 253
AC, Ms 115–16, 117, 118, 119              Bathroom exhaust fans 159
ACE-2 see Angiotensin converting          BCoV see Bovine coronavirus
    enzyme 2                              Beebi, Dallar 165
Acronyms and abbreviations 297–8          Beijing (China)
Administrative delays 168                    declared SARS-free 44–5
Adult respiratory distress syndrome          index case hospitalized 9
    (ARDS) 176, 178                          LSK, Mr 149–50
Aerosols 147, 159, 211, 213, 234, 288        media briefing 77
Aetiology of SARS 136–8, 210–11, 288         SARS virus spreads to 79–80
‘Affected areas’ 16, 262–3, 288              temperature measurements 82, 83
Age factors in SARS cases 175, 190, 191      WHO media briefing 31
A(H5N1) detection 7                          WHO team visit 34
AIDS/HIV 50, 132                             withholding of information 79
Air travel 50, 54, 69, 97–8, 125          Bekedam, Dr Henk 74, 77, 80
    see also Flights                      Bell, Dr David 57
Alanine transaminase (ALT) 179, 288       Biocontainment 234–8
Alice Ho Miu Ling Nethersole Hospital     Biosafety 234–8, 289
    (Hong Kong) 89                        Bloom, Dr Sharon 96
Aloha, Singapore 38                       Boeing 737-300 aircraft 149–54
ALT see Alanine transaminase              BOOP see Bronchiolitis obliterans
Alveoli 212, 289                             organizing pneumonia
Amoy Gardens (Hong Kong)                  Bovine coronavirus (BCoV) 200, 201,
    environmental transmission 39            202
    epidemic curve 156                    Breiman, Dr Robert 78
    index case hospitalized 20            Bronchiolitis obliterans organizing
    investigations 23, 31, 158–61            pneumonia (BOOP) 178
    outbreak 86, 157                      Brudon, Pascale 94, 95, 97–9, 168, 283
    residents evacuated/quarantined 25    Brundtland, Dr Gro Harlem 42, 53
Angiotensin converting enzyme 2           BSL2/3/4 facilities 234–8
    (ACE-2) 212, 213                      Bucket flushing of toilets 159–60
Anhui Medical University (China) 236      Bush, President George W 27
Animals 41, 74, 199–205, 225–8,
    231, 251                              C-type lectins 212–13
Annan, Kofi 170                           CA, Ms 145
Antibody testing 218–20                   Cambodia 269
Antibody-positive workers 226             Campbell, Justice Archie 132
Antiviral agents 212                      Canada
ARDS see Adult respiratory distress          declared SARS-free 45
    syndrome                                 Metropole Hotel significance 145
Association of Southeast Asian Nations       P, Mr 17
    (ASEAN) 34, 43                           Scarborough Hospital 17, 21,
Asymptomatic SARS infection 191–2                126–32
Atypical SARS cases 103, 181–2               TCK, Mr and CKL, Mr 13, 14
Avian influenza A(H5N1) 58, 74, 75           Toronto index case dies 10
Avian respiratory coronavirus 203–4          travel warning lifted 35
                                             two clusters of cases 42


                                                                     SARS: How a global
                                                                    epidemic was stopped   299
             Candidate vaccines 230–2                    Prince of Wales Hospital 87–8
             Cardiac manifestations 180–1                Tan Tock Seng Hospital 104
             Case definitions 67–8, 265–8, 289        Cockroaches 160
             Case fatality ratio estimate 37          Cocksedge, Dr Sandy 82
             Cattin, Dr Olivier 167, 168              Cofactors 201–2
             Caulford, Paul 126, 129–32               Collaboration 49–54, 187, 247–9
             Causation 136–8, 210–11                  Communicability period 188
             CD4/CD8 cells 180                        Communication modes 249–50
             CDC see Centers for Disease Control      Community control 82–4, 105–6, 248
                and Prevention                        Computed tomography (CT) 178
             Cellular immune responses 231            Condon, Dr Rob 57, 62, 283
             Centers for Disease Control and          Confirmation (antibody testing) 219–20
                Prevention (CDC) 12, 113              Congo 51
             Chan, Dr Margaret 91, 142, 158           Consolidation, pulmonary 177
             Che-hong, Dr Leong 92                    Contact risk of infection 119–20
             Children 191                             Contact tracing 115–21, 165, 247
             China                                    Containment 80–4, 114, 234–8, 243–4
                chronology of SARS outbreak 3–47      Control measures 82–4, 99–102, 248
                denial then mass mobilization 73–85      modelling 192–3
                flight CA112 16, 22, 24, 122,            Mongolian Government 124–5
                    149–54                               reproduction number 192
                laboratory-acquired SARS 236             Singapore 101–2, 105–6
                Nov/Dec 2002 ‘flu’ outbreak 53           see also Infection control
                officials fired 32                    Cooperation 49–54, 187, 247–9
                people involved in 2003 SARS          Cordingley, Peter 65, 66
                    response 269–74                   Coronavirus (CoV) family 21, 199–205,
                post-2003 cases 46–7                     210–13, 290
                public-health infrastructure 73       Coronavirus-like particles 19
                SARS-free declaration 43–4            Correlates of immune protection 231–2
                visa authorizations 78                CoV see Coronavirus
                see also Amoy Gardens; Beijing;       CPL, Ms 151–2
                    Guangdong Province;               CSL, Mr 110
                    Guangzhou; Hong Kong; Inner       CT see Computed tomography
                    Mongolia; Metropole Hotel;        CT, Mr 88, 145, 146
                    Taipei; Taiwan; Zhejiang          Cynomolgus macaques 210, 226, 231
             Chlamydia 6, 9, 210                      Cytokines 180, 202–3, 212, 291
             Chronology of SARS outbreak
                events 3–47                           Daily Regional Office routine 60
             Chang Gung Memorial Hospital             Daily reports 68
                (Kaohsiung, Taiwan) 111–12            Data on official surveillance 68–9
             Civet cats 227, 228, 231                 Dayrit, Dr Manuel 116, 120
             CKL, Mr 12, 146                          Definitions 288–96
             Clement, Tony 34                            see also Case definitions
             Clinical aspects 234–8                   Dendritic cells 213
                international collaboration 54        Detection of virus 220–2
                SARS infection 175–84                 Diagnostics 218–22
                SARS spread 49                        Diarrhoea 179, 200
                standard for surveillance 67–8        Dietz, Bob 65
                Urbani’s description 169              Disease surveillance see Surveillance
             Closures 111, 124, 164, 165              Doberstyn, Dr Brian 56, 57, 59, 62, 63,
             Clusters of SARS cases                      98, 283
                Amoy Gardens 86                       Droplet spread 291
                definition 290                           see also Aerosols; Nebulization
                Guangzhou 75                          DTs, Ms 123–4
                Ninh Binh Province 98                 DU, Mr 123–4


      SARS: How a global
300   epidemic was stopped
Easter in the Philippines 115            Flushing of toilets 159–60
Ebola outbreak in Congo 51               Food trade 34, 41, 225–6, 227, 251
EIA see Enzyme immunoassays              Fukuda, Dr Keiji 57
Electronic communications 52             Funding 64, 125
Electronic tracing 91                    Future aspects 243–54
Elevator lobby fans 147
ELISA see Enzyme linked                  Genetic aspects 30, 211, 213, 230
    immunosorbent assay                  Genome sequence 211
EM, Ms 9, 101, 102, 104, 118, 119,       Geylang Serai market (Singapore) 165
    145, 146                             Giesecke, Dr Kajsa 80
EMH, Ms 145                              Global alerts 13, 53, 54, 58–9, 169,
Eng-kiong, Dr Yeoh 90, 92, 155, 157         257–8
Enteric animal coronaviruses 199–200     Global collaboration 49–54, 185–7,
Enterocytes 212                             247–9
Environmental aspects 39, 147–8,         Global Outbreak Alert and Response
    158–61                                  Network (GOARN) 11, 52, 62, 113,
Enzyme immunoassays (EIA) 218–20            187
Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay        Global Public Health Intelligence
    (ELISA) 27–8, 219                       Network (GPHIN) 5, 51, 53, 250
Epidemic curves 87, 97, 103, 112, 156,   Glycosylated S protein 212
    187, 291–2                           GOARN see Global Outbreak Alert and
Epidemiology 49, 74–5, 185–93, 225,         Response Network
    292                                  Good laboratory practice 236
Epidemiology Surveillance Units (ESUs)   Good manufacturing practice 232
    (NEC, Philippines) 117               Government activities 91, 106, 124–5,
Escherichia coli 104                        164, 165, 247–8
ESUs see Epidemiology Surveillance       GPHIN see Global Public Health
    Units                                   Intelligence Network
Evacuation 155, 158                      Grace division (Scarborough Hospital,
Evans, Dr Merion 78                         Canada) 126–32
Events chronology 3–47                   Grolla, Allen 159
Evolution of SARS-CoV 230                Guangdong Province (China)
Exit screening 23, 69, 153                  animal markets 225
Expert recruitment 62–3                     avian influenza A(H5N1) 74, 75
                                            Chlamydia 210
Faeces 159, 211, 220–1                      LJL, Prof 141
Families A/B/C (Mongolia) 123               LTC, Mr 155
Family doctors, Toronto 129                 SARS outbreak 3–9
Fans 147, 159                               WHO experts 77–9
Feldmann, Dr Heinz 159                   Guangzhou (China) 75, 78, 81, 135–6,
Field Epidemiology Training Programme       141
    62, 117                              Guidelines 54, 69, 234, 235, 236–8
Filipino overseas workers 120–1
Finkelstein, Dr Sandy 128–30             Haematological manifestations 180
Flick, Dr Ramon 159                      Hanoi-French Hospital (Viet Nam) 94–6,
Flight attendants 152, 153                  167–9
Flight passengers 23, 97–8, 151          Health-care workers see Hospital staff
Flights 50, 69, 97–8, 125                Hepatic manifestations 179–80
    AF171 98, 153, 154                   Heroism 96, 98, 100, 129–30, 167–71
    CA112 16, 22, 24, 88, 122, 149–54    Heymann, Dr David L. 50, 92, 284
    CA115 150                            ‘High transmission’ 262–4
    CZ355 152                            Hindsight 243–54
    SQ25 15–16, 59, 153                  HIV/AIDS 50, 132
    TG614 27, 152, 154



                                                                    SARS: How a global
                                                                   epidemic was stopped   301
             Hong Kong (China)                              Metropole Hotel infections 144, 145
                A(H5N1) detection 7                         Mongolia122
                Amoy Gardens 20, 23, 25, 31, 39,            Philippines 30, 115–19
                    155–61                                  Prince of Wales (Hong Kong) 88
                atypical pneumonia reports 6                Singapore 9, 27, 101, 104
                flight CA112 cases identification 22    Infection control 114, 138
                hospitals under siege 86–92                 see also Barrier nursing; Isolation;
                LSK, Mr 79                                  Quarantine
                Metropole Hotel 8, 9, 18, 39, 88, 89,   Infection risk 119–20
                    141–8                               Infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) 203–4
                people involved in 2003 SARS            Infectious Diseases Act (Singapore) 36,
                    response 272–3                          102
                Princess Margaret Hospital 11, 90       Infectivity 145, 211, 212, 244
                quarantine 28                           Influenza 7, 14, 53, 167
                students asked to stay at home 21           see also Avian influenza
                see also Prince of Wales Hospital       Information 68–9, 76–7
             Hoping Hospital (Taiwan) 32, 33, 110,          see also Collaboration;
                111                                         Communication; Data
             Hospital staff 190, 191, 192               Inner Mongolia 80, 83–4, 122, 152
                Hanoi-French Hospital 168               Intensive care units 178
                Prince of Wales Hospital (Hong Kong)    Inter-governmental organizations 248
                    87                                  International collaboration 49–54, 187,
                risk of infection 119                       247–9, 248–9
                Scarborough Hospital (Canada)           International Conference on Emerging
                    126–32                                  Infectious Diseases (2004) 227
                Taiwan outbreak 110–11                  International Health Regulations 293
             Hospitals 105, 114, 189, 190               International Labour Organization 27,
                see also individual hospitals               152
             Host susceptibility genetics 213           International Organization for
             Hotel staff 147                                Standardization (ISO) 237
             Household tracing 91                       International staff 248–9
             Household transmission 190                 International travel see Flights
             Human rights issues 246                    Internet communications 250
             Humoral responses 231                      Interspecies transmission 204
                                                        Intestinal manifestations 179
             IBV see Infectious bronchitis virus        Investigations 141–61, 163–5, 167–9
             IFA see Immunofluorescence assays          ISO see International Organization for
             IgG/IgA/IgM 218–19, 292                        Standardization
             Immune hyper-reactive phase 176            Isolation 130, 132, 157, 243, 247, 253
             Immunity 230–2                             Italy 170–1
             Immunoassays 222
             Immunofluorescence assays (IFA) 218,       Japan 64
                 219                                    JC, Mr 11, 94, 120, 143, 145, 146,
             Import controls 109                            167–8
             In-flight transmission 40                  JC, Ms 118, 119
                 see also Flights                       Jen Chih Hospital (Taiwan) 111
             Incubation period 188, 244, 292            Jiabao, Premier Wen 29
             Index cases                                Jong-wook, Dr Lee 170
                 Amoy Gardens (Hong Kong) 20, 155–7
                 Beijing 9                              Kang-wen, Wu 113
                 China 12                               Kiang, Lim Hng 102, 163, 164
                 definition 292–3                       King, Peter 63–4
                 Hanoi 8–9, 11                          Koch’s postulates 210, 226, 293
                 Flight CA112 149–50                    Koplan, Dr Jeffrey 92
                                                        KSC, Ms 142, 143, 145, 146


      SARS: How a global
302   epidemic was stopped
Kwong Wah Hospital (Hong Kong) 8,         Mild infections 192
  141, 144                                Miranda, Dr Elizabeth 56, 285
                                          MLC, Ms 110
LA, Mr 118, 119                           Modelling studies 192–3
Laboratory network 17, 19, 36, 210, 213   Molecular evolution 211
Laboratories 218–22, 234–8                Mongolia 29, 38, 122–5, 275
Laboratory Biosafety Manual (WHO, 3rd     Montgomery, Dr Joel 98
    Edition) 237, 238                     Mortality 182
Lao People’s Democratic Republic 274      Mutations 230
LeBlanc, Louise 128–32
Lectins 212–13                            Nasopharyngeal samples 220–1
Legal aspects 36, 84, 90, 157, 293        National Epidemiology Center (NEC)
Lessons learnt 243–54                        (Philippines) 116–17
Leuco-thrombocytopenia 169                National Institute of Virology (China)
Live animals 41, 74, 225–8, 231, 251         236
LJL, Prof 8, 88, 135, 141–3, 144, 147     National Law on Communicable
Local transmission 123–4, 262–4              Diseases Prevention and Control
Loss of business 86, 113, 125, 245           (China) 84
‘Low transmission’ 262–4                  National disease surveillance 252–3
LSK, Mr 16, 79, 149–50                    National University Hospital (Singapore)
LTC, Mr 20, 155–7                            163
Lymphocytes 180, 293                      Natural course of SARS infection 176
Lymphopenia 212, 294                      Nebulization 88, 138, 211, 213, 234
                                          NEC see National
Macao (China) 273                         Neurological manifestations 181
Macapagal-Arroyo, President Gloria        Neutralization tests (NT) 219
   117, 120                               Ngee Ann Polytechnic College
Macaques 210, 226, 231                       (Singapore) 26
Malaysia 34, 44, 45, 274                  Ninh Binh Province (Viet Nam) 98
Manila Regional Office of WHO 56–66,      Ninth floor of Metropole Hotel 143, 147
   246–7, 249                             No. 2 Affiliated Hospital of Zhongshan
Mauritania 171                            Medical University 135–6, 141
MC, Mr 118, 119                           Nobel Peace Prize 171
MC2, Mr 118, 119                          Novel viruses 200–1, 210, 213
MCY, Ms 152                               NS, Ms 122, 123–4
MDB, Ms 118, 119                          NT see Neutralization tests
Mechanical ventilation 178–9, 181         Nucleocapsid (N) gene 221
Medal for People’s Health (Viet Nam)      29-Nucleotide sequence 211, 226
   100                                    Nursing staff see Hospital staff
Médecins Sans Frontières 98, 171
Media 65–6, 76, 77, 111, 131, 246–7       Official reports 68–9
Medicines, Chinese local 76               Olivé, Dr Jean-Marc 65, 117, 285
‘Medium’ categorization 121, 262–4        Omi, Dr Shigeru 53, 73, 84, 171
Memorial Service 170                      Operations room 59–60
Metro Manila 115, 116                     Order of Friendship (Viet Nam) 100
Metropole Hotel (Hong Kong) 88, 89, 101   ORF8 211
   index case arrives 8                   Oshitani, Dr Hitoshi 56, 57, 62, 74, 75,
   investigations into transmission          95, 96, 168, 169
       routes 141–8                       Outbreaks
   link identified 18                        definition 294
   ninth floor 142, 143, 147                 Mongolia 122–5
   viral spread across world 146             Philippines 115–21
   WHO findings 39                           post-outbreak containment 234–8
Migrant workers 81                           Scarborough Hospital (Canada)
                                                 126–32


                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   303
               Singapore wholesale vegetable                 (PEDV) 200
                   market 163–5                          Porcine respiratory coronavirus (PRCV)
               Taiwan 109–14                                 200–3
               see also Clusters; Global Outbreak        Post-outbreak period 46–7, 234–8
                   Alert and Response Network;           PRCV see Porcine respiratory
                   Global Public Health Intelligence         coronavirus
                   Network; Super-spreading events       Preparedness 64
             Overseas Filipino workers 120–1             Prince of Wales Hospital (Hong Kong)
             OZ, Ms 123–4                                    A&E closed 18
                                                             CT, Mr 88, 145, 146
             P, Mr 17                                        index case admitted 10
             PA, Mr 152                                      LSK, Mr 16, 79, 149
             PA, Ms 102, 104                                 LTC, Mr 155, 156
             Pacific island countries and areas 275          outbreak 12–13, 87–8
             Palm civets 227, 228                            preliminary investigations 14
             Pamela Youde Nethersole Eastern             Princess Margaret Hospital (Hong Kong)
                 Hospital (Hong Kong) 89                     11, 90, 92
             Pangasinan province (Philippines) 115,      Procurement 64
                 116, 117                                Prodromal symptoms 177
             Papua New Guinea 276                        Prognostic factors 182
             Paramyxovirus 19                            Public areas 190
             Park, Dr Sarah 113                          Public health 73, 82–4, 245–6
             Pasir Wholesale Market (Singapore) 105,         see also Global Public Health
                 163–5                                   Intelligence Network
             Passengers on aircraft 23, 97–8, 151        Public Information Office (Manila) 65
                 see also Flights                        Public perceptions 131
             Pathogenesis of SARS-CoV 211–12             Public spending 245
             Patient characteristics 190–1               Pulmonary manifestations 177–9, 181,
             PC, Ms 118, 119                                 182
             PEDV see Porcine epidemic diarrhoea
                 virus                                   Qiang, Gao 84
             People who worked on SARS response          Qin, Dr Yang 80
                 269–80                                  Quantitative RT-PCR 212
             ‘People’s surveillance’ 82–4                Quarantine
             Period of communicability 188, 294             Aloha, Singapore 38
             Personal protective equipment 59, 63,          Amoy Gardens residents 157, 158
                 98, 125, 168, 189                          Beijing 82
             Phases of SARS infection 175–6                 Hong Kong 28
             Philippines                                    human rights 246
                 contact tracing 115–21                     importance 247
                 index case isolated 30                     Philippines 117–18
                 lessons learnt 244                         Singapore 22, 29, 38, 106, 165
                 people involved in 2003 SARS               Taiwan outbreak 111, 114
                     response 275                           Zhejiang Province, China 36
                 SARS-free declaration 40                   The Quarantine and Prevention of
                 WHO classification criticized 38, 121         Disease Ordinance (1936)
                 WHO transmission classification 37            (Hong Kong) 90, 157
                 wrongly included as ‘affected area’     Queen Elizabeth Hospital (Hong Kong)
                     17                                     89
             Plant, Professor Aileen 96, 286             Queen Mary Hospital (Hong Kong) 89
             Pneumocytes 212
             Pneumoenteric coronaviruses 202–3           R0 see Reproduction number
             Pneumomediastinum 178–9                     Rare disease surveillance 51
             Polymerase chain reaction 179, 294          Rats 160, 227
             Porcine epidemic diarrhoea virus            RC, Mr 118, 119


      SARS: How a global
304   epidemic was stopped
Real-time RT-PCR 221                       Screening 35, 218, 219, 227
Reclassification of cases 267              Sensitivity of detection methods 220–2
Recruitment 62–3                           Serial interval 192
Regional Office of WHO, Manila 56–66,      Serologic confirmation 219
   246–7, 249                              Settings for SARS transmission 189–92
Regulation on Public Health Emergency      Sewage systems 39, 158–60
Response (China) 84                        Shiing-jer, Twu 113
Regulatory aspects 232                     Shipping fever 202
Renal manifestations 180                   Singapore
Reporting 186                                  epidemic curve 103
   China 76                                    flight CA112 infections 151–2
   daily from SARS-affected countries 68       flight SQ25 15–16
   infectious diseases 114                     food markets closed 34
   official surveillance data 69               index case hospitalized 9
   problems 252–3                              Infectious Diseases Act 36, 102
   procedures 267–8                            laboratory-acquired SARS case 235,
Reproduction number (R0) 192–3                     237
Research Institute for Tropical Medicine       Metropole Hotel significance 142,
   (RITM) (Philippines) 117, 118                   145
Research laboratories see Laboratories         Pasir Panjang Wholesale Market
Research studies 41                                163–5
Resistance (microbial) 213                     people involved in 2003 SARS
Respiratory animal coronaviruses                   response 276
   199–200                                     post-2003 cases 46
Respiratory failure 176, 178, 182              quarantine 22, 29, 106
Respiratory specimens 222                      respiratory sample shows
Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain             coronavirus-like particles 19
   reaction (RT-PCR) 212, 220–1                SARS-free declaration 42
Review of procedures (Hong Kong) 91            three cases identified/isolated 11
Reynolds, Dr Mary 95                           transparency 245
Risk of infection 119–20                       waves of transmission 101–7
RITM see Research Institute for Tropical       WHO alerts 102
   Medicine                                Singapore General Hospital 27, 104–5
RNA 212, 213, 220–1                        South Africa 29
Roles 247–9, 252                           Spread see Transmission
RT, Mr 120                                 Stability of SARS-CoV 211
RT-PCR see Reverse transcriptase-          Staff
   polymerase chain reaction                   antibody-positive workers 226
Rumours 69–70, 75–6, 97–8                      hotel staff 147
                                               international 248–9
Safety 234–8                                   Manila Regional Office 62–3
St Paul’s Hospital (Hong Kong) 9, 89           SARS response workers 269–80
San Lazaro Hospital (Manila) 116, 118          Taiwan dismissals 113
SARS-CoV 210–13, 218–19, 225–8,                see also Hospital staff
    230–2, 234–8                           Standard case definitions 67–8
SARS-designated hospitals 90, 105          Standards 234, 235, 236–8
SARS Expert Committee (Hong Kong) 91       Stool samples 159, 211, 220–1
SARS Laboratory Workshop, Geneva           Super-spreading events 5, 79, 101, 135–
    235                                            9, 192, 296
SARS Outbreak Response and                     see also Clusters of infections
    Preparedness Team 61–3                 Supplies 63–4
Scarborough Hospital (Toronto) 12, 21,     Surveillance
    126–32                                     case definitions 265–8
Schistosoma mansoni 171                        Chinese ‘people’s’ 82–4
Schnur, Mr Alan 74–5, 77, 78                   global for SARS 185–7


                                                                      SARS: How a global
                                                                     epidemic was stopped   305
                information types 68–9                     hidden 110
                problems 252–3                             interspecies 204
                rumour surveillance process 69–70          Metropole Hotel investigations 141–8
                unusual disease events 51                  Mongolia 123–4
                Western Pacific Region system setup        patterns 262–4
                    67–70                                  Philippines 118–19
                WHO surveillance network                   travel 50
                    establishment 52                       Viet Nam 99
                                                           waves in Singapore 101–7
             Taiching (Taiwan) 110                         WHO classification 38
             Taipei, China 151, 236, 237                   WHO report 262–4
             Taiwan Center for Disease Control 113         see also Clusters; Outbreaks; Super-
             Taiwan (China)                                    spreading events
                 declared SARS-free 45                  Transparency 244–5
                 epidemic curve 112                     Travel see Air travel; Flights
                 first case reported 15                 Travel advisory notices 17, 25, 26
                 outbreak starts 32                        China 37, 79, 84
                 outbreak story 109–14                     Hebei Province 40
                 people involved in 2003 SARS              Hong Kong
                      response 273–4                       lessons learnt 250–1
                 post-2003 cases 46                        Toronto 33
             Tan Tock Seng Hospital (Singapore) 101,       Viet Nam 97–8
                 102–5, 152, 163, 164                      WHO document 259–61
             Target tissues 200                         Travel screening 35, 82
             TCK, Mr 12, 14–15, 127                     Tsang Ho-fai, Dr Thomas 158
             Teleconferences 54, 60, 249–50             TSC, Mr 25, 104, 163
             Temperature checks 23, 29, 35, 82, 83,     TsD, Ms 123–4
                 165
             TEPHINET see Training in Epidemiology      UB, Ms 123–4
                 and Public Health Intervention         Unaffected countries 64
                 Programs Network                       Unilateral pulmonary consolidation 177
             Three-phase SARS infection 176             United Christian Hospital (Hong Kong)
             Throat swabs 220                              89, 157
             Thrombocytopaenia 296                      United Kingdom 31
             Thrombosis 181                             Unusual disease events 51
             Thu, Dr Vu Hoang 167, 168                  Urbani, Dr Carlo 94, 95, 98, 100
             Thuong, Prof Nguyen Van 168                   death 24, 170
             Tilgner, Immo 159                             early cases information 14
             TJH, Mr 145                                   email to Drs Oshitani and Doberstyn
             TKC, Mr 27, 104, 163                              56–7
             Toilet flushing 159–60                        examines Hanoi index case 9–10
             Tong, Prime Minister Goh Chok 106,            heroic actions 167–71
                 164                                       isolation ward in Bangkok 58
             Toronto (Canada) 10, 15, 33, 41, 115          leaves for Bangkok feeling ill 13
             Tourism 125                                   tribute 169–71
             Train to Taiching (Taiwan) 110             Urine 211, 220
             Training in barrier techniques 253         Uyeki, Dr Tim 95, 169
             Training in Epidemiology and Public
                 Health Intervention Programs           Vaccines 204, 230–2, 296
                 Network (TEPHINET) 62                  Vancouver General Hospital 12
             Transmission 188–92, 211                   Vanquaille, Peter 62–3
                 Beijing outbreak 79–80                 Variations (genetic) 230
                 CA112 flight 16, 22, 24, 122,          VCC, Mr 144
                      149–54                            Vegetable markets 163–5
                 clinical/epidemiological features 49   Ventilation, mechanical 178–9


      SARS: How a global
306   epidemic was stopped
Videoconferences 250                       global alerts 13, 53, 58–9, 257–8
Viet Nam                                   Guangdong investigations 77–9
   alarming situation in Hanoi 11          holds virtual ‘grand rounds’ 22
   epidemic curve 97                       issues new travel advice 23, 25–6
   Hanoi-French Hospital 167–71            Laboratory network 17, 19, 36, 210
   Hanoi index case hospitalized 8–9       Laboratory Biosafety Manual (3rd
   new cluster of cases 26                     Edition) 237, 238
   outbreak description 57, 94–100         Manila Regional Office 56–66,
   people involved in 2003 SARS                246–7, 249
        response 276–7                     new form of coronavirus confirmed
Vinegar 76, 82                                 as SARS agent 30
Viral genome 30, 211, 212                  people involved in 2003 SARS
Viral lineage 138                              response 277–80
Viral load 138, 159, 176, 178, 212         role definition in epidemics 252
Viral replication phase 175–6              SARS Laboratory Workshop 235
Viral shedding 188                         Singapore alert 102
Viral testing 220–2                        surveillance network 52
Visa authorizations 78                     transmission classification 38
                                           travel advisory documents 259–68
Websites 54, 66                            travel restrictions not justified 17, 21
Wenkang, Zhang 80                          travel warning to Toronto lifted 35
Western blot analysis 219                  Urbani, Dr Carlo 9–10, 13, 14, 24
Western Pacific Regional Office of WHO     Western Pacific Regional Office
   11–12, 56–66, 67–70, 277–8                  mobilizes 11–12
WHO see World Health Organization          see also Travel advisory notices
Wild animals 225–6, 251                  Wu Yi, Madame 80
Wong, Dr William 113
World Health Assembly 42                 Xiaoping, Tang 136
World Health Organization (WHO)          Xuenong, Mayor Meng 80
   Ad Hoc Working Group on
       Epidemiology 187                  Yanyong, Dr Jiang 79
   ‘affected areas’ list 16              Yi, Dr Guan 227
   case fatality ratio estimate 37       YM, Ms 79
   clinical update 19–20
   coronavirus-like particles found in   Zhejiang Province, China 36
       Singapore respiratory sample 19   Zhenglun, Dr Xiao 76
   early outbreak detection 51–2         Zhongshan Medical University 135–6,
   environmental experts team 147–8,        141
       158–9                             ZZF, Mr 135–6, 141
   environmental transmission at Amoy
       Gardens 39




                                                                       SARS: How a global
                                                                      epidemic was stopped   307
.................................................................................................




        L e a r n i n gfrom
                                                 S A R S



                                                 Renewal of
                                                 Public Health
                                                 in Canada


...............................................................................................
.................................................................................................




        L e a r n i n gfrom
                                                 S A R S



                                                  Renewal of
                                                  Public Health
                                                  in Canada
A report of the National Advisory Committee on SARS and Public Health
October 2003

..........................................................................................          i
                  .................................................................................................

                  The members* of the National Advisory Committee on SARS and Public Health were:
                  • Dr. David Naylor, Dean of Medicine at the University of Toronto (Chair)
                  • Dr. Sheela Basrur, Medical Officer of Health, City of Toronto
                  • Dr. Michel G. Bergeron, Chairman of the Division of Microbiology and of the Infectious Diseases Research
                    Centre of Laval University, Quebec City
                  • Dr. Robert C. Brunham, Medical Director of the British Columbia Centre for Disease Control, Vancouver
                  • Dr. David Butler-Jones, Medical Health Officer for Sun Country, and Consulting Medical Health Officer for
                    Saskatoon Health Regions, Regina
                  • Gerald Dafoe, Chief Executive Officer of the Canadian Public Health Association, Ottawa
                  • Dr. Mary Ferguson-Paré, Vice-President, Professional Affairs and Chief Nurse Executive at
                    University Health Network, Toronto
                  • Frank Lussing, Past President and CEO of York Central Hospital, Richmond Hill
                  • Dr. Allison McGeer, Director of Infection Control, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto
                  • Kaaren R. Neufeld, Executive Director and Chief Nursing Officer at St. Boniface Hospital, Winnipeg
                  • Dr. Frank Plummer, Scientific Director of the Health Canada National Microbiology Laboratory, Winnipeg (ex officio)

                  * The Committee was materially assisted through corresponding members of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and
                    the World Health Organization.




                  This publication can also be made available in/on
                  computer diskette/large print/audio-cassette/Braille
                  upon request.

                  For further information or to obtain additional copies,
                  please contact:
S A R S




                  Publications
                  Health Canada
                  Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0K9
                  Tel.: (613) 954-5995
f r o m




                  Fax: (613) 941-5366

                  ©Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, 2003
                  Cat. H21-220/2003E
L e a r n i n g




                  ISBN: 0-662-34984-9
                  Publication Number: 1210 Learning from SARS:
                    Renewal of Public Health in Canada


                  ii         .........................................................................................
                              SARS and Public Health




PREFACE
.................................................................................................



The National Advisory Committee on SARS and Public           We learned very rapidly that Canada’s ability to fight an
Health was established in early May 2003 by the              outbreak such as SARS was tied more closely to the
Minister of Health of the Government of Canada, the          specific strengths of our public health system than to the
Hon. A. Anne McLellan, in the circumstances surrounding      general capacity of our publicly-funded personal health
the outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome            services system. By public health, we refer to systems
[SARS]. The Committee’s mandate was to provide a             that are population-focused, and include functions such
“third party assessment of current public health efforts     as population health assessment, health and disease
and lessons learned for ongoing and future infectious        surveillance, disease and injury prevention (including
disease control.”                                            outbreak or epidemic containment), health protection,
                                                             and health promotion. Our analysis and our
The Minister asked the Committee to build on current         recommendations accordingly set out a plan for a
public health interventions, and to foster and encourage     comprehensive renewal of both the public health system
collaboration among jurisdictions, professionals, and        in general, and the nation’s capacity to detect, prevent,
institutions. We were urged to work towards integration      understand, and manage outbreaks of significant
of all aspects of the containment of SARS (epidemiology,     infectious diseases.
management, communication, and international
coordination). The outbreak of SARS in the Greater           The Committee went about its data gathering and




                                                                                                                           C a n a d a
Toronto Area was contained during our mandate, as            analysis in the following way.
expected. Therefore, we extended this integrative
approach to our analysis, and recommendations regarding      We reviewed a broad range of source documents, research,
emerging infectious diseases and public health in general.   and reports from Canada and other countries applicable
                                                             to SARS, communicable disease control, and public




                                                                                                                           i n
Most of this report deals with two major elements of our     health infrastructure more generally. The chair and a staff
mandate: provision of a short-term assessment of lessons     member personally interviewed in person or by
learned from current public health interventions to          telephone a range of informants involved in the Toronto

                                                                                                                           H e a l t h
contain SARS, and advice regarding issues for necessary      outbreak. The Committee’s deliberations were also
longer-term action regarding infectious disease control      greatly assisted by one full-time policy and research
and prevention.                                              advisor, and two part-time research/editorial associates.
                                                                                                                           P u b l i c
                                                                                                                           o f
                                                                                                                           R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                           iii
                  .................................................................................................

                  Two key reports were solicited from outside consultants.     As noted in the Acknowledgements, our work was
                  One, by Prof. Sujit Choudhry of the University of            informed not only by our own experience and that of
                  Toronto Faculty of Law, dealt with legal issues, including   our colleagues, but by the many non-governmental and
                  the difficult question of jurisdictional authorities. With   voluntary sector stakeholders who wrote briefs, letters,
                  permission, we borrow directly from Prof. Choudhry’s         responded to requests for interviews, and provided
                  report in this document, although it should not be           information that enriched our deliberations and
                  assumed that he would agree in all respects with the         recommendations. In this regard we reviewed
                  conclusions we have drawn from it. The other                 approximately 30 written submissions (see report
                  consultancy, by the Hay Health Care Consulting Group         appendix for list).
                  [the Hay Group] in Toronto, entailed interviews, a
                  survey, and an analysis of hospital service profiles, to     We also requested preparation of extensive background
                  provide an overview of the preparedness of the Greater       documents from Health Canada staff in the Population
                  Toronto Area health system to respond to SARS, the gaps      and Public Health Branch. The Committee was allowed
                  perceived by stakeholders, and the steps that had been       direct and unfettered access to leading professionals in
                  or might be taken to improve responses to infectious         the Branch who in turn were given explicit licence to
                  outbreaks in future. We worked with the Hay Group            offer their expert opinions and advice, unconstrained by
                  to incorporate their findings directly into our report.      the normal reporting hierarchy. Some senior staff drafted
                  Health Canada’s Office of Nursing Policy organized           material for the report itself. All such material was first
                  roundtables with front-line health care workers; the         revised by staff as per the Committee’s requests, then
                  findings from that valuable exercise have also been          edited or rewritten extensively by the Committee
                  incorporated into the report.                                members.

                  Discourse among members involved about thirty hours
                  of face-to-face meetings, and a substantial amount of
                  electronic and telephone traffic. We live, work, and pay
                  taxes in several different provinces. The members of the
                  Committee represent a multitude of disciplines and
                  perspectives, and several were directly involved in
                  responding to SARS in diverse capacities.
S A R S
f r o m
L e a r n i n g




                  iv        .........................................................................................
                                             SARS and Public Health




TABLE OF CONTENTS
.................................................................................................



Preface. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii
Executive Summary. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Chapter 1 — Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
  Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
  Globalization and Communicable Disease. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
  The World Health Organization (WHO). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
  US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
  A “CDC North”? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
  Emergency Preparedness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
  The State of Canada’s Public Health System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
  Federal/Provincial/Territorial Structures and Linkages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
  Canada’s SARS Experience. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
  Learning from SARS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Chapter 2 — SARS in Canada: Anatomy of an Outbreak. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
  2A. A New Disease in Guangdong (November 27, 2002 - February 22, 2003). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
  2B. From Kowloon to Scarborough (February 23, 2003 - March 12, 2003) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24




                                                                                                                                                                                          C a n a d a
  2C. SARS I: The Outbreak Begins (March 13, 2003 - March 25, 2003) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
  2D. The Emergency (March 26, 2003 - April 7, 2003). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
       2D.1    Information Technology and Data Sharing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
       2D.2    Scientific Advisory Committee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
       2D.3    Leadership . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
       2D.4    Health Canada’s Role . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
       2D.5    Public Communications and Media Relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32




                                                                                                                                                                                          i n
       2D.6    Research. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
       2D.7    Laboratories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33


                                                                                                                                                                                          H e a l t h
       2D.8    Clinical Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
  2E. The Quest for Containment (April 8, 2003 – April 23, 2003) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
       2E.1    Public Health’s Fight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
       2E.2    Primary Care . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
       2E.3    Transmission of SARS to Protected Health Care Workers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
       2E.4    WHO Travel Advisory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
                                                                                                                                                                                          P u b l i c


  2F. Between the Waves (April 24, 2003 - May 22, 2003) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
       2F.1    Hospital Infection Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
       2F.2    North York General Hospital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
  2G. SARS II (May 23, 2003 - June 30, 2003) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
  2H. SARS and the Health Care Worker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
  2I. Epilogue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
                                                                                                                                                                                          o f




Chapter 3 — The Role and Organization of Public Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
  3A. What is Public Health? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
                                                                                                                                                                                          R e n e w a l




       3A.1    The Origins of Public Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
       3A.2    Defining Modern Public Health Practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46



..........................................................................................                                                                                            v
                  .................................................................................................

                       3B.   Governance and Organization of Public Health in Canada. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
                             3B.1       Some Constitutional and Legislative Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
                             3B.2       Organization of Public Health Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
                             3B.3       The Challenge of Public Health in Rural and Remote Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
                       3C. Public Health in the Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
                       3D. Funding Public Health in Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
                             3D.1       National Spending on Public Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
                             3D.2       Expenditure Trends in Ontario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
                             3D.3       A Modest Investment by Any Measure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
                       3E. International Comparisons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
                             3E.1       United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
                             3E.2       United Kingdom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
                             3E.3       Australia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
                       3F. Some Reflections and Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
                       References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
                       Appendix 3.1 — US Department of Health and Human Services Organizational Chart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
                  Chapter 4 — Enhancing the Public Health Infrastructure: A Prescription for Renewal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
                    4A. Core Elements of the Public Health Infrastructure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
                    4B. A New National Public Health Focus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
                         4B.1    General Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
                         4B.2    What Does ‘National’ Mean? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
                         4B.3    The Structure of a New Federal Agency for Public Health. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
                    4C. A Chief Public Health Officer for Canada. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
                    4D. Scope of the Canadian Agency for Public Health. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
                    4E. A Federal Agency with a Pan-Canadian Orientation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
                         4E.1    One Agency, Many Locations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
                         4E.2    A National Public Health Advisory Board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
                         4E.3    A National Public Health Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
                    4F. Funding to Strengthen Canadian Public Health Capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
                         4F.1    General Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
                         4F.2    Funding the Core Agency Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
                    4G. A New Public Health Partnership Program for Provinces and Territories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
                         4G.1    Level of Funding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
                         4G.2    Programmatic Funding: Some Constitutional and Legal Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
                         4G.3    Funding Instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
                         4G.4    Current Program of Grants and Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
                         4G.5    Reinvigorating a National Immunization Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
                    4H. Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
                    Appendix 4.1 — Population and Public Health Branch: Current Organization Chart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
                  Chapter 5 — Building Capacity and Coordination: National Infectious Disease Surveillance,
                  Outbreak Management, and Emergency Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
                    5A. Surveillance and Outbreak Management: Essential Functions for Public Health. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
                         5A.1    Surveillance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
                         5A.2    Outbreak Management and Investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
                    5B. The Auditor General’s Perspective. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
                    5C. Managing Public Health Emergencies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
                         5C.1    Public Health qua Firefighting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
                         5C.2    The National Emergency Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
                         5C.3    Focal Points for Health Emergencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
S A R S




                         5C.4    The Post-September 11 Environment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
                         5C.5    Building Surge Capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
                         5C.6    Crisis Communications to the Public: A Missing Link. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
                    5D. National Capacity and Network for Disease Surveillance & Outbreak Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
                    5E. Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
f r o m




                    Appendix 5.1 — Costing of a Surveillance System. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
                    Appendix 5.2 — Case Definitions for SARS from Health Canada and Ontario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
                    Appendix 5.3 — Some Steps toward Achieving Seamless Outbreak Management in Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
L e a r n i n g




                  Chapter 6 — Strengthening the Role of Laboratories in Public Health and Public Health Emergencies . . . 113
                    6A. Key Activities of Laboratories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
                         6A.1     Diagnosis of Infections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
                         6A.2     Characterization of Micro-organisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114


                  vi             .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

         6A.3    Reference Microbiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
         6A.4    Support to Epidemiologic Surveillance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
         6A.5    Laboratory Surveillance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
         6A.6    Environmental Surveillance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
         6A.7    Chronic Disease Surveillance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
         6A.8    Emergency Preparedness and Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
         6A.9    Applied Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
         6A.10 Fundamental Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
    6B. The Public Health Laboratory System in Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
         6B.1    Front-line Laboratories (Private, Local and Hospital Laboratories) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
         6B.2    Provincial Laboratories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
         6B.3    National Laboratories and National Laboratory Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
         6B.4    International Laboratory Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
    6C. Analysis of the Laboratory Response to SARS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
    6D. The Ideal Public Health Laboratory System for Canada. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
    6E. Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
    Appendix 6.1 — Canadian Public Health Laboratory Network (CPHLN) Draft Terms of Reference . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
Chapter 7 — Public Health Human Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
  7A. The Effect of SARS on Professional Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
  7B. Current Supply of Public Health Professionals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
        7B.1    Public Health Physicians. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
        7B.2    Public Health Nurses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
        7B.3    Laboratory Personnel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
        7B.4    Infection Control Practitioners and Hospital Epidemiologists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
        7B.5    Infectious Disease Specialists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
        7B.6    Epidemiologists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
        7B.7    Other Public Health Workers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
        7B.8    Overall Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
  7C. Nature of Education and Training. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
        7C.1    Physicians . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
        7C.2    Nursing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
        7C.3    Epidemiologists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
  7D. A Public Health Human Resources Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
  7E. Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
  Sources and References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
Chapter 8 — Clinical and Public Health Systems Issues Arising from the Outbreak of SARS in Toronto . . . 141




                                                                                                                                                                                 C a n a d a
  8A. Scope and Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
  8B. Readiness of the Health System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
       8B.1     Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
       8B.2     Roles and Responsibilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
       8B.3     Emergency Structure/Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
       8B.4     Hospital Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
       8B.5     Communications Structures and Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149




                                                                                                                                                                                 i n
       8B.6     Surveillance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
       8B.7     Health Human Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153


                                                                                                                                                                                 H e a l t h
       8B.8     Psychosocial Implications of SARS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
  8C. Services Impact and Backlog Estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
       8C.1     Impacts on Emergency Department Visit/Admission Volumes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
       8C.2     Surgery Volumes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
       8C.3     Patient Days and Occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158
       8C.4     Elective Surgery Backlog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160
                                                                                                                                                                                 P u b l i c


  8D. Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160
Chapter 9 — Some Legal and Ethical Issues Raised by SARS and Infectious Diseases in Canada . . . . . . . . . . 163
  9A. General Legislative and Governance Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
       9A.1     Legislation and Regulation as Components of the National Public Health Infrastructure . . . . . . . . 163
       9A.2     Governance Aspects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164
  9B. Jurisdictional Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
                                                                                                                                                                                 o f




       9B.1     Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
       9B.2     Public Health and the Criminal Law Power. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
                                                                                                                                                                                 R e n e w a l




       9B.3     Public Health and the POGG Power. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
       9B.4     The International Imperative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 168
       9B.5     Other Bases for Federal Legislation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
       9B.6     The US Analogue. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169

..........................................................................................                                                                                 vii
                  .................................................................................................

                            9B.7       Federal Legislation as Default . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
                      9C.   Existing and Proposed Federal Legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
                            9C.1       The Proposed Canada Health Protection Act . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
                            9C.2       Federal Privacy Legislation and Public Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
                            9C.3       Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
                      9D. Provincial Legislation on Infectious Disease Outbreaks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174
                            9D.1       Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174
                            9D.2       The Model State Emergency Health Powers Act . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174
                            9D.3       Initial Assessment of Provincial Laws in light of the Model Act. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
                      9E. Federal Health Emergencies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 176
                      9F. Ethical Issues and Lessons from the SARS Outbreak . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
                      9G. Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 180
                      References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181
                  Chapter 10 — Emerging Infectious Disease Research in Canada – Lessons from SARS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183
                    10A. Emerging Infectious Disease Research: A First Look at the Canadian Record on SARS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 184
                    10B. Outbreak Investigations and Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 186
                    10C. Reflections on the Research Response to Epidemics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 188
                         10C.1 Business as Usual. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 188
                         10C.2 Mobilization of Scientific Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 188
                         10C.3 Leadership, Organization, and Direction of Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189
                         10C.4 Funding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 191
                         10C.5 Communications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193
                    10D. Capacity for Relevant Public Health and Infectious Disease Research in Canada. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193
                    10E. Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 194
                  Chapter 11 — Viruses without Borders: International Aspects of SARS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 197
                    11A. International Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 197
                          11A.1 Health Canada’s Role . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 197
                          11A.2 World Health Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199
                    11B. International Response to SARS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199
                          11B.1 WHO Response to SARS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199
                          11B.2 International Experiences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 200
                    11C. Canadian-International Communication and Liaison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 201
                    11D. Travel Advisories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 202
                          11D.1 WHO Advisories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 202
                          11D.2 Health Canada Advisories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 203
                    11E. SARS and Travel Issues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 203
                          11E.1 Quarantine Act . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 204
                          11E.2 Quarantine Officers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 205
                          11E.3 Screening Measures and Provision of Health Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 205
                          11E.4 Protocols for Airlines and Cruise Ships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 206
                    11F. Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 207
                    References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 207
                    Appendix 11.1 — A Chronology of SARS Travel Screening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 208
                    Appendix 11.2 — SARS Screening Measures - Daily Report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209
                  Chapter 12 — Learning from SARS: Renewal of Public Health in Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211
                    12A. Preparing for the Respiratory Virus Season. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 213
                    12B. Recommendations for Renewal of Public Health in Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 214
                         12B.1 New structures for Public Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 214
S A R S




                         12B.2 New Funding for Public Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 215
                         12B.3 National Public Health Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 215
                         12B.4 Emergency Planning, Outbreak Management and Crisis Communications. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 215
                         12B.5 Surveillance/Data Gathering and Dissemination. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 216
                         12B.6 Clarifying the Legislative and Regulatory Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 216
f r o m




                         12B.7 Renewing Laboratory Infrastructure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 217
                         12B.8 Building Research Capacity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 217
                         12B.9 Renewing Human Resources for Public Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 218
                         12B.10 International Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 218
                         12B.11 Clinical and Local Public Health Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 219
L e a r n i n g




                    12C. Postscript . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 220
                  Appendix 1 — Interviews and Submissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221



                  viii           .........................................................................................
                               SARS and Public Health




EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
.................................................................................................



Mandate of the Committee                                       Outside of Asia, Canada was the country hardest hit by
                                                               SARS. As of August 2003, there had been 438 probable
The National Advisory Committee on SARS and Public             and suspect SARS cases in Canada, including 44 deaths.
Health was established in early May 2003 by the                The majority of SARS cases and all deaths were concen-
Minister of Health of the Government of Canada, the            trated in Toronto and the surrounding Greater Toronto
Hon. A. Anne McLellan, in the circumstances surrounding        Area [GTA]. The toll on health care workers was high:
the outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome [SARS].      more than 100 became ill and three succumbed.
The Committee’s mandate was to provide a “third party
assessment of current public health efforts and lessons        Public health and health care workers in Ontario and
learned for ongoing and future infectious disease control.”    British Columbia did an admirable job of containing
Committee members represented a multitude of disci-            SARS. Health care workers caring for SARS patients were
plines and perspectives from across Canada. Several were       at heightened risk for contracting a new and dangerous
directly involved in responding to SARS in different           disease, and worked under physical and psychological
capacities. We reviewed source documents, conducted            stress. Lack of certainty about diagnosis and treatment
interviews, and engaged consultants to undertake surveys,      added to the clinical challenges. SARS also placed
additional interviews, and analyses to illuminate aspects      unprecedented demands on the public health system,
of the SARS experience. Advice was also sought from a          challenging regional capacity for outbreak containment,




                                                                                                                              C a n a d a
constitutional legal expert. Over 30 non-governmental          surveillance, information management, and infection
and voluntary sector stakeholders submitted helpful            control.
briefs and letters.
                                                               A great many systemic deficiencies in the response to
                                                               SARS were identified as the Committee went about its
SARS in Canada                                                 task. Among these were: lack of surge capacity in the




                                                                                                                              i n
                                                               clinical and public health systems; difficulties with timely
SARS is a droplet-spread viral illness, apparently caused by
                                                               access to laboratory testing and results; absence of


                                                                                                                              H e a l t h
a novel coronavirus. Emerging in China in November 2002,
                                                               protocols for data or information sharing among levels
SARS spread across the globe over the course of several
                                                               of government; uncertainties about data ownership;
weeks. About 8,500 persons worldwide were diagnosed
                                                               inadequate capacity for epidemiologic investigation of
with probable SARS during the epidemic, and there were
                                                               the outbreak; lack of coordinated business processes
over 900 deaths. SARS remains a challenge to diagnose
                                                               across institutions and jurisdictions for outbreak
                                                                                                                              P u b l i c


and manage because its symptoms resemble those of
                                                               management and emergency response; inadequacies in
many other respiratory infections. SARS was managed
                                                               institutional outbreak management protocols, infection
primarily by supportive measures for those affected, with
                                                               control, and infectious disease surveillance; and weak
isolation and infection control precautions in hospital,
                                                               links between public health and the personal health
as well as tracing and quarantine of contacts. Diagnosis
                                                               services system, including primary care, institutions,
rested on the clinical syndrome, a link to known cases of
                                                                                                                              o f




                                                               and home care.
SARS, and a process of exclusion. Available laboratory
tests were not consistently helpful during the acute phase
                                                                                                                              R e n e w a l




of the illness.



..........................................................................................                                1
                  .................................................................................................

                                                                                 Primary responsibility for public health services is at the
                  Emerging Infectious Diseases,                                  municipal or local level, through about 140 health units
                  Globalization, and Bioterrorism                                and departments that serve populations ranging from
                                                                                 600 to 2.4 million people, with catchment areas from
                  SARS is only the most recent example of emerging               4 to 800,000 square kilometres. The next level of
                  infectious diseases—diseases that are newly identified,        organization is provincial or territorial. At the provincial/
                  or that have existed previously but are increasing in          territorial [P/T] level, staff engage in planning, administer
                  incidence or geographic range. Since 1973, more than           budgets, advise on programs, and provide technical
                  30 previously unknown diseases associated with viruses         assistance to local units as needed. The P/T-level capacity
                  and bacteria have emerged. Examples include: Ebola             for coordination and technical support of local health
                  virus (1977); Legionnaire’s disease (1977); E. coli 0157:H7-   agencies varies sharply from one province to the next.
                  associated hemolytic uremic syndrome (1982); HIV/AIDS
                  (1983); Hepatitis C (1989); variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob          Two provincial models are noteworthy. British Columbia
                  disease (1996); and H5N1 Influenza A or avian flu (1997).      established its Centre for Disease Control in 1997 to take
                  West Nile virus infection is an example of a disease that      responsibility for provincial-level management of infectious
                  has increased its geographic range. As well, some known        disease prevention and control, including laboratories.
                  infectious diseases, such as tuberculosis, have re-emerged     Quebec established the National Public Health Institute in
                  in vulnerable populations.                                     1998 by transferring in staff from several regional public
                                                                                 health departments and the ministry; it oversees the main
                  According to World Tourism Organization data, approxi-         public health laboratories and centres of expertise. The
                  mately 715 million international tourist arrivals were         Quebec Institute has a mandate that covers prevention,
                  registered at borders in 2002. Human migration has been        health promotion, healthy living, workplace health,
                  a key means for infectious disease transmission throughout     and chronic disease prevention as well as infectious
                  recorded history. However, the volume, speed, and reach        disease control.
                  of travel today have accelerated the spread of infectious
                  diseases.                                                      Federal activity is concentrated in the Population and
                                                                                 Public Health Branch [PPHB] of Health Canada. PPHB is
                  Compounding the challenges of dealing with emerging            headquartered in Ottawa, with regional offices across
                  and re-emerging infectious diseases, is the threat of the      Canada. It includes Centres for Infectious Disease
                  accidental or intentional release of biological agents as      Prevention and Control, Chronic Disease Prevention and
                  highlighted by the intentional release of anthrax spores       Control, Emergency Preparedness and Response, Surveillance
                  in the USA in the Fall of 2001.                                Coordination, and Healthy Human Development. PPHB
                                                                                 also oversees the National Microbiology Laboratory in
                  Public Health in Canada:                                       Winnipeg and the Laboratory for Foodborne Zoonoses in
                                                                                 Guelph. Other branches in Health Canada and other
                  Organization and Jurisdiction                                  government departments and agencies are involved with
                                                                                 public health to a variable extent.
                  Among the functions of public health are health
                  protection (e.g., food and water safety, basic sanitation),
                                                                                 From a constitutional perspective, public health is
                  disease and injury prevention (including vaccinations
                                                                                 primarily a provincial concern. However, the federal
                  and outbreak management), population health
                                                                                 government has authority to legislate aspects of public
                  assessment; disease and risk factor surveillance; and
                                                                                 health owing to its powers over, variously, the criminal
                  health promotion. The public health system tends to
                                                                                 law, matters of national concern for the maintenance of
                  operate in the background unless there is an unexpected
                                                                                 “peace, order and good government”, quarantine
S A R S




                  outbreak of disease such as SARS or failure of health
                                                                                 provisions and national borders, and trade and commerce
                  protection as occurred with water contamination in
                                                                                 of an interprovincial or international nature. Behind the
                  Walkerton, Ontario (2000) or North Battleford,
                                                                                 formal division of powers is an essential tension in the
                  Saskatchewan (2001). An effective public health system
                                                                                 Canadian F/P/T fabric: much administrative responsibility
f r o m




                  is essential to preserve and enhance the health status of
                                                                                 rests with the P/T level, while revenue generation and
                  Canadians, to reduce health disparities, and to reduce the
                                                                                 therefore spending capacity is concentrated at the federal
                  costs of curative health services. Public health also plays
                                                                                 level. In the latter respect, Ottawa does not currently
                  a key role in disaster and emergency response.
                                                                                 make any earmarked transfers to other governments for
L e a r n i n g




                                                                                 public health. PPHB instead operates a $200 million per
                                                                                 annum program of grants and contributions directed to
                                                                                 non-profit and non-governmental organizations.

                  2         .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


Public Health Capacity and Funding                             public and private sectors combined, and $79.4 billion
                                                               for the public sector alone. Public health therefore
There have been many calls to strengthen public health         accounts for 1.8% to 2.5% of total health expenditures,
infrastructure in Canada over the last decade. For example,    and 2.6% to 3.5% of public expenditures. Provincial
in late 1993, given the global spread of HIV, Health           spending clearly varies, but so do methods of accounting
Canada organized an Expert Working Group on Emerging           at the provincial level.
Infectious Disease Issues. This ‘Lac Tremblant’ group
called for “a national strategy for surveillance and control   International Models
of emerging and resurgent infections”, support and
enhancement of “the public health infrastructure necessary     Australia and the USA are federations with constitutional
for surveillance, rapid laboratory diagnosis and timely        division of powers similar to Canada. The US Centers for
interventions for emerging and resurgent infections”,          Disease Control and Prevention [CDC] has an interna-
coordination and collaboration in “setting a national          tional reputation for excellence in public health. Over
research agenda for emerging and resurgent infections”,        2,000 of the approximately 8,600 full-time equivalent
“a national vaccine strategy”, “a centralized electronic       employees work outside the CDC headquarters in Atlanta;
laboratory reporting system to monitor human and non-          this includes postings to 47 state health departments.
human infections”, and strengthening “the capacity and
flexibility to investigate outbreaks of potential emerging     Although it is best known for investigating disease outbreaks,
and resurgent infections in Canada”. A decade later, very      the CDC is actually a broad public health agency; and
similar recommendations are repeated in our report.            much of its budget is directed to an extensive system of
                                                               federal grants and transfers to states and municipalities in
In 1998, Mr. Justice Horace Krever provided a general call     support of public health infrastructure. The CDC works
to improve public health in his report of the “Commission      with states to set and monitor standards. It oversees a
of Inquiry on the Blood System in Canada”. An F/P/T            national health alert and surveillance system, a national
report on Public Health Capacity was prepared at the           workforce development and continuing education initiative
request of the F/P/T Conference of Deputy Ministers of         for public health practitioners and related laboratory
Health, and presented to them in June 2001. It high-           personnel, and a public health information network.
lighted the weaknesses in public health infrastructure         The CDC’s National Public Health Laboratory System
across Canada, pointing to disparities in capacity from        develops policies and public-private partnerships for
one province to the next; concerns about the relative low      improved and timely reporting of laboratory results.
priority given to longer-term disease and injury prevention
strategies; weaknesses in human resources for public           In Australia, the federal government pays for half of




                                                                                                                                C a n a d a
health; and growing recruitment/retention difficulties.        public health services—30% via direct expenditure and
In 2002, the Romanow Commission recommended a                  22% via transfers to states and territories. Joint public
national immunization strategy, a physical activity            health activities are coordinated through the National
strategy, and strengthening prevention programs. The           Public Health Partnership under the auspices of the federal
Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and       and state/territorial health ministers. The Partnership




                                                                                                                                i n
Technology chaired by Senator Michael Kirby also reported      has clear priorities such as: improving public health
in 2002. The Senate Committee called for the federal           practice; developing public health information systems;


                                                                                                                                H e a l t h
government to commit $125 million annually towards             reviewing and harmonizing public health legislation;
chronic disease prevention. It also cited inconsistent         implementing public health workforce initiatives;
funding, poor coordination among jurisdictions, and            strengthening national public health research and devel-
an overall lack of accountability and leadership, in           opment capacity; enhanced coordination of national
recommending additional funding of $200 million                public health strategies; and developing standards for the
annually to enhance public health infrastructure               delivery of core public health strategies. Federal transfers
                                                                                                                                P u b l i c



across Canada.                                                 occur through Public Health Outcome Funding Agreements
                                                               that have targets and reporting requirements. A national
Given variation in accounting, it is difficult to generate a   program for public health education and research funds
precise estimate of current public health spending in          Australian tertiary institutions to strengthen post-graduate
Canada. We roughly estimate total public health                education and training.
                                                                                                                                o f




expenditures in Canada (2002 - 2003) to range from
$2.0 to $2.8 billion depending on the definition used.
                                                                                                                                R e n e w a l




Total health spending in 2002 was $112.2 billion for the



..........................................................................................                                 3
                  .................................................................................................

                  The USA and Australia, as well as the UK, each have a          Centralizing the agency in a single new location would
                  coherent chain of policy, stretching from legislation,         be disruptive for existing staff and fail to capitalize on
                  national goals and priorities, national strategies, programs   the full range of opportunities for partnership in P/T and
                  to sustain the public health infrastructure (including         municipal jurisdictions. We recommend instead selective
                  human resources), means of reaching agreement between          expansion of activities in Ottawa, Winnipeg, and other
                  stakeholders, and specific funding programs. There are         existing sites, along with deliberate devolution of some
                  targets with timelines and accountability mechanisms.          core functions to new locations across Canada. An effort
                  In contrast, Canada does not have national health goals,       should be made to co-locate federal agency hubs with
                  a related strategy, or programs of federal transfers to        provincial and regional centres of excellence in public
                  facilitate implementation of a national strategy.              health. Activities in these sites would thus become
                                                                                 mutually reinforcing, and help foster a common F/P/T
                                                                                 culture focused on protecting the health of Canadians.
                  A New Canadian Agency for
                  Public Health                                                  We also recommend that, as an early priority, the new
                                                                                 agency initiate the collaborative development of a national
                  The current federal arrangement puts public health             public health strategy. The strategy should include
                  professionals inside a very large department with a            specific health targets, benchmarks for progress towards
                  highly process-oriented culture geared to meeting the          them, and collaborative mechanisms to maximize the
                  political issues of the day. Vesting those functions in an     pace of progress. In developing a national strategy, the
                  arm’s-length agency would enhance the credibility and          new agency must not only work with P/T jurisdictions
                  independence of federal activities in public health, and       and other federal departments and agencies, but consult
                  offer more flexibility in terms of employment and              widely with stakeholders in the broader health community.
                  partnerships with NGOs. An agency could also better            The current program of transfers to NGOs should also be
                  foster a collaborative F/P/T culture rooted in shared          reviewed and aligned with the national health strategy.
                  expertise among public health professionals. The creation
                  of an agency cannot depoliticize interactions among            The Committee further recommends the prompt creation
                  jurisdictions, but it can reduce the chances that the          of a National Public Health Advisory Board to advise the
                  health of Canadians would inadvertently be held hostage        Chief Public Health Officer of Canada on the most
                  in a jurisdictional disagreement among levels of government.   effective means to create and implement the above-noted
                  Among our key recommendations therefore is that the            national public health strategy. The nomination process
                  Government of Canada create a new Canadian Agency              should build pan-Canadian collaboration by involving
                  for Public Health, led by a Chief Public Health Officer        existing F/P/T networks and advisory committees.
                  of Canada.                                                     Members would be appointed to limited terms by the
                                                                                 federal Minister of Health.
                  A Canadian Agency for Public Health is arguably best
                  structured as a Legislated Service Agency, analogous to        Many core functions of the new agency can be developed
                  the Canadian Food Inspection Agency, the Canadian              simply by transferring in current activities and capacity.
                  Institutes of Health Research, or Statistics Canada. The       Relevant core functions directly within PPHB currently cost
                  Chief Public Health Officer of Canada would be the chief       about $187 million per annum (2002 budget). Adding in
                  executive of the new federal agency and report directly to     extant grants and contributions that amount to contracted-
                  the federal Minister of Health. The Chief Public Health        out functions, we reach $225 million as a rough estimate
                  Officer of Canada would also issue an annual report on the     of spending on core functions within PPHB. About
                  state of the public’s health and the public health system.     $75 million of the costs of operations in other branches
                                                                                 of Health Canada could also fall within a new agency’s
S A R S




                  Public health agencies, centres, and institutes around         mandate, for a notional total of $300 million spent
                  the world vary in their scope. It is premature for the         in 2002.
                  Committee to recommend precisely which activities
                  and programs should be included at this point, beyond          The Committee has recommended that the current core
f r o m




                  indicating our support for a strong and integrative            functions be expanded to include greater investments
                  organization. A systematic review is required to establish     in: disease surveillance systems; health emergency
                  the scope of the new agency. A more effective approach         preparedness and epidemic response capacity; a major
                  to continuing challenges in First Nations and Inuit            and urgently-needed program of development of public
L e a r n i n g




                  health must be considered as part of any scoping process.      health human resources; substantial augmentation of
                                                                                 research spending; enhancement of federal laboratories;



                  4         .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

capacity-building partnerships with provincial and              The availability of these funds underscores our assumption
hospital laboratories pending other F/P/T investments;          that any new federal spending on public health should
and coverage of relatively neglected areas such as              be matched in some respects by P/T spending. But without
environmental health, mental health, injury prevention,         earmarked federal monies for public health, P/T spending
and public health ethics.                                       will be drawn, as always, to personal health services and
                                                                opportunities for leverage and coordination will be lost.
These activities will require gradual increases in budget
for core functions. The additional spending is projected        As an alternative to new federal transfers, some may
to reach $200 million dollars per annum within 3 to             argue that the federal government should simply pass
5 years. A proportion of these new monies for core              legislation that imposes obligations on provinces and
functions would flow to extramural partners, e.g., in           territories with respect to disease surveillance or public
support of research programs allied with the Canadian           health emergencies. Arguments in constitutional law can
Institutes of Health Research [CIHR], for salaries of           indeed be made for more federal intervention in public
federal personnel seconded into P/T public health               health. However, federal legislation that sought to
agencies as per the CDC model, and to create new                conscript P/T personnel or unilaterally regulate their
academic, institutional, and NGO partnerships for               activities would lead to unfunded mandates and F/P/T
human resource development.                                     political and legal confrontations.

                                                                Thus, following the Australian and US models, the
Federal Funding to Renew Public                                 Committee is recommending a comprehensive set of
Health across Canada                                            funding arrangements and processes designed to facilitate
                                                                F/P/T collaboration. The goal of these transfers is to
A stronger federal presence in public health, vested in a       create a seamless multi-tiered public health system,
new agency with enhanced intramural and extramural              knitted together by inter-governmental agreements and
capacity, would only go partway to remedying the                harmonized legislation or regulation.
deficiencies evident during the SARS outbreak. Public
health in the first instance is a local enterprise. Provinces   The Committee explicitly rejected the concepts of either
and territories in turn must fund, support, and coordinate      passive transfers without accountability or block funding
local activities through their own agencies and ministries.     that could become a flashpoint for F/P/T disagreement.
As a corollary, the containment of SARS was clearly             Instead, we have endorsed a depoliticizing strategy in
dependent on local and provincial efforts in Ontario and        which new federal funding flows through the new agency
British Columbia. Even greatly enhanced technical               to P/T and municipal jurisdictions, targeting programs




                                                                                                                                C a n a d a
support and outbreak investigation by a federal agency          and activities according to agreements among public
will be somewhat irrelevant if the local and regional           health professionals. The Committee firmly believes the
capacity for outbreak response is weak. The public              new agency’s impact will be strongly dependent on its
health infrastructure needs strengthening at all levels,        ability to flow federal funds in support of front-line
and this in turn suggests the need for earmarked federal        (local) and P/T public health agencies. Absent an ability
funding that is not currently provided.




                                                                                                                                i n
                                                                to fund or co-fund programs with those governments and
                                                                agencies that have primary constitutional responsibility
Public health did not figure directly in the two F/P/T          for public health, a new federal agency will almost certainly


                                                                                                                                H e a l t h
Health Accords reached in September 2000 and                    be resented as an irrelevant job creation program staffed
February 2003. The first Accord provided $23.4 billion          by technical experts who are better at talking to each
in new federal funds for the six-year period from 2000-01       other than supporting serious front-line work. And absent
to 2005-06. The second provided for $34.8 billion               meaningful and earmarked federal funding, Canada’s public
($30.9 billion new monies) in federal funds for health          health infrastructure will remain a flimsy patchwork.
                                                                                                                                P u b l i c



for the five-year period from 2003-4 to 2007-8. While
billions of dollars were earmarked for personal health          The Committee has therefore recommended three
services, the two Accords together appear to include over       programs of transfers with a total value that will rise,
$20 billion in non-earmarked transfers that could be            over the course of several years, to a target level of
used by P/T jurisdictions in part for spending on public        $500 million per annum: $300 million per annum for a
                                                                                                                                o f




health infrastructure.                                          Public Health Partnerships Program to build general
                                                                capacity in public health at the local/municipal level;
                                                                                                                                R e n e w a l




                                                                $100 million per annum targeted at communicable
                                                                disease surveillance and control with a particular


..........................................................................................                                  5
                  .................................................................................................

                  emphasis on P/T level or second-line capacity; and             working on matters such as leadership and coordination;
                  $100 million per annum to bolster the currently under-         surge capacity; training and education; surveillance and
                  funded National Immunization Strategy. These funds             detection infrastructure (including laboratories); supplies;
                  could be combined and managed according to the                 and communications. We have recommended acceler-
                  Social Union Framework Agreement, thereby giving more          ation of support for the Network’s activities with a special
                  flexibility for federal and P/T officials to align transfers   focus on communicable disease control.
                  with both P/T needs and the national strategic plan for
                  public health.                                                 The Committee sees an urgent requirement for multi-
                                                                                 jurisdictional planning to create integrated protocols for
                                                                                 outbreak management, followed by training exercises to
                  Communicable Disease Control and                               test the protocols and assure a high degree of preparedness
                  Health Emergency Management                                    to manage outbreaks. To create surge capacity, the F/P/T
                                                                                 Network for Emergency Preparedness and Response has
                  Health surveillance involves the tracking and forecasting      already been working towards establishment of Health
                  of important health events or determinants through the         Emergency Response Teams [HERT]. The HERT model has
                  continuous collection of relevant data, and the creation       been developed as a multidisciplinary group of clinical
                  and dissemination of reports, advisories, alerts, and          and support personnel for “all hazards”. The SARS
                  warnings as needed. The 1999 and 2002 reports of the           experience highlights the need to mobilize selected groups
                  Auditor General of Canada raised serious questions about       of skilled personnel into epidemic response teams within
                  the F/P/T collaborative framework for infectious disease       the HERT framework.
                  surveillance and outbreak management. Although some
                  progress has been made, these concerns—both as regards         To accelerate collaborative activities in infectious disease
                  detection of emerging infectious disease threats and           surveillance and outbreak management, we have
                  communication of alerts regarding such threats—have            recommended the creation of a new F/P/T Network for
                  been underscored by the SARS experience.                       Communicable Disease Control. This new F/P/T network
                                                                                 would reinforce the collaborative activities of the F/P/T
                  Thus, the Committee has recommended that F/P/T                 Network for Emergency Preparedness and Response.
                  governments urgently strengthen surveillance programs.
                  Action would focus first on communicable diseases, and         The new F/P/T Network for Communicable Disease
                  then be extended to non-communicable diseases and              Control (and the associated funding arrangements)
                  relevant population health factors. These surveillance         would be Canada’s second line of defence against ‘the
                  programs must be coupled to short-term investments in          next SARS’. The new F/P/T network would create
                  support of hospital infection control.                         connections not only among strengthened provincial
                                                                                 and regional centres of excellence in infectious disease
                  Some legal issues in surveillance also require short-term      control. It could also link these P/T nodes or hubs and
                  attention. The Personal Information Privacy and Electronic     the relevant centres and laboratories in the new federal
                  Documents Act [PIPEDA] will come into full force on            agency. As noted, we recommend an approximate target
                  January 1, 2004. It is not clear if PIPEDA applies to          of $100 million per annum in earmarked funding inside
                  health care providers. To the extent that PIPEDA does          the new agency’s envelope for transfers to build the
                  apply, its restrictions on the non-consensual use of           required capacity at the P/T level and maintain the new
                  health information could inadvertently interfere with          F/P/T network. The flow of federal funds must be tied to
                  disease surveillance activities that pose no particular        intergovernmental agreements and initiatives to secure
                  threat to privacy. PIPEDA’s application to the health          standardized business processes and a harmonized
                  sector accordingly requires an urgent review, culminating      legislative framework for disease surveillance and
S A R S




                  in separate federal health information privacy legislation,    outbreak management.
                  amendments, or clarifying regulations.
                                                                                 Some federal funding and concerted action to ensure
                  F/P/T collaboration in emergency preparedness and              national preparedness should begin as soon as possible
f r o m




                  response is more advanced than in health surveillance          given the forthcoming winter season of upper and lower
                  and outbreak management. This collaboration was                respiratory diseases; specific recommendations for short-
                  triggered by tragic terrorist attacks on the USA in            term action are included in our report.
                  September 2001. Since March 2002, an F/P/T Network
L e a r n i n g




                  for Emergency Preparedness and Response has been




                  6         .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

As noted earlier, SARS has also raised concerns about the      option is used by the USA and Australia to improve basic
legislative framework for health emergencies management        public health infrastructure. Funding for programs can
in Canada. Since the Fall of 2001, all jurisdictions have      be directed at, for example, specific health protection
been reviewing and upgrading their emergency planning          and disease prevention programs, information systems,
and preparedness frameworks. However, the F/P/T                laboratory capacity, training, recruitment and retention,
legislative frameworks for health emergencies have not         and emergency response capacity. The programmatic
been analyzed for comparability and interoperability.          option can be combined with cost-sharing, e.g., some
We have recommended a general intergovernmental                programs could offer a percentage of the cost, up to a
review to harmonize F/P/T public health legislation, with      defined maximum, with the province or territory finding
specific attention to public health emergencies within         the balance. Such targeted transfers with associated
extant emergency legislation.                                  accountability mechanisms are useful ways to align
                                                               funding and policy direction. They also reduce the risk
A related concern is lack of clarity about jurisdiction when   that existing spending would simply be displaced.
a health threat affects multiple provinces. The federal
Emergencies Act (R.S. 1985, c. 22 (4th Supp.)) confers very    Spending through the new partnerships program would
wide powers on the federal government and can only be          be increased over several years to a target of $300 million
invoked in the face of a truly grave national threat. The      per annum, and aligned with the national public health
federal government otherwise has uncertain authority           strategy.
in the face of a multi-provincial outbreak. This situation
is particularly problematic as the World Health
Organization [WHO] moves to establish International
                                                               National Immunization Strategy
Health Regulations that set expectations for member            Since the 1990s, there has been interprovincial diversity
states as regards surveillance, reporting, and outbreak        in the publicly-funded programs and legislation pertaining
management. We recommend that consideration be                 to immunization and vaccination. The current arrange-
given to a federal health emergencies act to be activated      ments compromise purchasing power, limit the security
in lockstep with provincial emergency plans in the event       of vaccine supply, and put providers in the untenable
of a pan-Canadian health emergency.                            position of having to recommend vaccines to persons/
                                                               families who cannot afford them.
Last, the Committee determined that neither Health
Canada nor most jurisdictions and institutions have            Four new vaccines are currently unfunded in most
developed sophisticated frameworks for risk                    P/Ts—conjugate pneumococcal vaccine, conjugate
communication during a public health crisis. The CDC           meningococcal vaccine, varicella vaccine and acellular




                                                                                                                              C a n a d a
has a comprehensive crisis communications training             pertussis vaccine. An F/P/T expert group proposed in
program that, in our view, bears close study and early         2001/02 that the federal government pay for the new
adaptation by Canadian governments and institutions.           vaccines while P/Ts cover the costs of administration.
                                                               To support their case, those involved produced documen-
Public Health Partnerships Program                             tation showing meaningful health and economic




                                                                                                                              i n
                                                               benefits from more complete coverage and upgrading
While priority must be given in the short term to              of vaccination strategies.


                                                                                                                              H e a l t h
infectious disease surveillance and outbreak management
capacity, the broad range of public health functions also      The 2003 federal Budget provided only $45 million over
requires support and coordination. In many local health        five years ($5 million in year one, and $10 million a year
units, the same personnel help fight an outbreak one day       thereafter) “to assist in the pursuit of a national immu-
and inspect restaurants or deliver a health promotion          nization strategy.” As noted, the Committee believes
seminar the next.                                              that $100 million per annum should be earmarked for a
                                                                                                                              P u b l i c



                                                               major reinvigoration of the National Immunization
We accordingly recommend that a new Public Health              Strategy under the auspices of the new Canadian Agency
Partnerships Program be established under the auspices         for Public Health. This amount would cover about 50%
of the Canadian Agency for Public Health. The new              of the steady-state cost to P/T jurisdictions for purchasing
partnerships program would flow funds through specific         the new vaccines. Some of the funds should also be used
                                                                                                                              o f




agreements with P/T public health officials, aimed at          to improve tracking systems for vaccination coverage.
reinforcing core public health functions at the local level
                                                                                                                              R e n e w a l




and collaborative arrangements across jurisdictions. This



..........................................................................................                               7
                  .................................................................................................

                                                                                 associations. A budget for this purpose has been built
                  Public Health Human Resources                                  into our projections for new spending by the Canadian
                  The 2003 federal Budget allotted $90 million over five         Agency for Public Health. The strategy should not only
                  years for health human resources, but no funds were            aim at making Canada self-sufficient as regards public
                  earmarked specifically for the public health workforce.        health personnel; it should also explicitly aim at enhancing
                  A clear shortfall in public health human resource planning     inter-jurisdictional collaboration on a continuing basis.
                  and development was recognized in the 2001 Survey of
                  Public Health Capacity in Canada. The Committee found          Public Health Laboratories
                  few definitive data on public health human resources,
                  but those data raised concerns.                                Canada’s medical laboratories are operated variously by
                                                                                 investor-owned corporations, non-profit hospitals and
                  Community medicine specialists serve as medical officers       health regions. All provincial governments except New
                  of health in local public health agencies, and provide         Brunswick operate public health laboratories. Ontario’s
                  specialized expertise for the provincial and federal           provincial laboratory could not meet the demands for
                  governments. Public health physicians are needed in rural      SARS testing; rapid and impressive steps were therefore
                  areas, the Atlantic provinces, the northern territories,       taken by laboratory workers in various hospitals in
                  and areas served by Health Canada’s First Nations and          Toronto to establish diagnostic capacity for the coronavirus.
                  Inuit Health Branch.                                           Unfortunately, as hospital laboratories took over testing
                                                                                 for SARS, the ability to monitor data at the national and
                  Experts estimate that there are approximately 12,000 public    even provincial level was undercut because of poor infor-
                  health nurses in Canada. The Canadian Nurses Association       mation systems and the lack of data sharing protocols.
                  estimates that Canada will be short 78,000 registered          Linkage of already-limited epidemiologic data to laboratory
                  nurses by 2011. Some experts suggest that Canada is            test results became even more challenging.
                  already short 16,000 nurses. Unfortunately, information
                  about the nursing workforce is not collected in a way          This experience underscores our general observation that
                  that makes it possible to extract definitive data on public    Canadian laboratory activities in infectious disease
                  health nurses.                                                 testing and outbreak response are not well-coordinated
                                                                                 or adequately linked to clinical and epidemiologic data.
                  Medical and PhD-trained microbiologists are in very            As recommended in the Lac Tremblant report a decade
                  high demand; current output is too low. There is also a        ago, Canada should initiate an active and collaborative
                  shortage of infection control practitioners [ICP]. ICPs are    laboratory surveillance system to anticipate, detect and
                  mostly either nurses (88%) or laboratory technologists         respond to infectious disease threats.
                  (10%) who learn on the job. Forty-two percent of Canadian
                  hospitals fail to meet the current US standard of one ICP      Such a system necessitates better integration of front-line
                  per 250 active care beds and 80% cannot attain the new         laboratories into the public health system. Steps in that
                  Canadian standard of one ICP per 175 active care beds.         direction have been taken by the Canadian Public Health
                  Fewer than 60% of Canadian hospitals have a qualified          Laboratory Network [CPHLN]. The CPHLN is coordinated
                  physician serving as infection control director. Canada        by the directors of the provincial and national labora-
                  also needs more epidemiologists with an orientation to         tories and some federal public health leaders. CPHLN
                  field investigation and outbreak response.                     membership should either be extended to major hospital
                                                                                 laboratories or these hospitals should be incorporated
                  In short, on multiple levels, be it staffing for core public   into provincial networks represented in CPHLN. The
                  health functions or at the interface of clinical and public    Committee’s spending projections incorporate additional
S A R S




                  health activities, there is an acute shortage of highly        support for provincial public health laboratories and for
                  qualified personnel.                                           the CPHLN to draw in a wider range of laboratory partners.
                                                                                 We have also recommended an F/P/T collaborative review
                  The Committee has recommended that F/P/T governments           of various aspects of the public health laboratory system.
                  move expeditiously to develop and implement a national
f r o m




                  strategy to renew and sustain public health human
                  resources. The strategy should be based on a partnership
                  (after the Australian model) involving governments, aca-
L e a r n i n g




                  demic stakeholders, institutional partners, and professional




                  8         .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


Research                                                         advance the teams and business processes for rapid
                                                                 epidemic or outbreak investigation, and thereby
Multiple governments and agencies have now invested              strengthen Canada’s ability to respond to the ‘next SARS’.
millions of dollars into SARS research. For example, the
CIHR has taken a lead role in organizing the national            More generally, Australia, the UK, and the USA all have
SARS Research Consortium. Funding partners in the                embedded a strong research and science component in
Consortium include a range of federal and provincial             their public health activities. A new Canadian agency
agencies, as well as private sector partners. The Consortium     must therefore combine enhanced intramural R&D
intends to support work in diverse areas, such as diagnostics,   capacity with extramural funds that will allow contracting
vaccine development, therapeutics, epidemiology,                 out of R&D functions through partners such as the CIHR.
databases, public health, and community impact.                  Parallel investments by provinces are also required.
                                                                 Intramural R&D activities at the F/P/T level should be
However, the immediate research response to SARS was             linked to academic health institutions and major munici-
uneven. Research into the cause of SARS, the character-          pal health units through co-location, joint venture research
ization of the agent, the development of diagnostic tests,       institutes, cross appointments, joint recruitment, inter-
and generation of initial clinical descriptions was conducted    change, networks and collaborative research activities.
and communicated relatively rapidly. Research on the
immune response with the goal of developing a SARS               Regional and Clinical Issues
vaccine has progressed well. Scientists in Vancouver and
Winnipeg were among the leaders internationally in               During the first wave of SARS in Ontario (SARS I), the
sequencing the SARS coronavirus. This success arose              government declared a provincial emergency and mandated
from prior collaborative arrangements and capacity. It           reductions in elective and ambulatory hospital activity.
underscores the importance of support for fundamental            Outbreak management was overseen by a Provincial
research and the need for research networks that are             Operations Centre. Multiple institutions were involved
operational in advance of an outbreak.                           in caring for SARS patients. During a second wave of
                                                                 SARS (SARS II) from the third week of May to the end of
On the other hand, research on many fundamental                  the outbreak in July, the caseload was strategically
epidemiologic and clinical aspects of SARS has lacked            concentrated in four designated institutions, and
cohesion. Scientists in Hong Kong were able to produce           outbreak management was overseen by a SARS
seminal epidemiologic and clinical descriptions while            Operations Centre established within the Ontario
responding to a larger epidemic than Canada’s. Our               Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care.
incapacity arose in part from previously-identified issues




                                                                                                                                C a n a d a
of leadership, coordination, data collection and manage-         In Ontario, confusion arose at times as to who was in
ment, data sharing, and weak mechanisms to link epidemi-         charge of the outbreak response. GTA hospitals had
ologic and clinical to laboratory data.                          difficulties implementing some of the directives issued by
                                                                 the provincial government. No Toronto hospital had
The lack of capacity also reflects training and funding          made infectious diseases a program priority, and there




                                                                                                                                i n
priorities, as well as problems of coordination. The CIHR’s      was no regional framework for outbreak management to
submission advised that its investment in infectious             coordinate responses across institutions or health service


                                                                                                                                H e a l t h
disease research “flows primarily to support biomedical          sectors. Occupational health and safety issues were a
research (84%), and the emphasis on biomedical research          recurrent source of tension within institutions. Family
in this field is stronger than in the CIHR’s overall portfolio   physicians perceived that authorities moved slowly in
(72%).” The CIHR is now attempting to build stronger             advising them on precautions to be taken in their offices,
clinical and epidemiologic research capacity in infectious       or giving them support and supplies. There were no
diseases, but has highlighted a lack of coordination among       regularized processes for sharing and compensating staff
                                                                                                                                P u b l i c



federal and other agencies in developing a research agenda       appropriately during an emergency such as SARS. In the
and capacity.                                                    public health sphere, informants criticized the lack of
                                                                 coordination across the four involved local units, the
The Committee has recommended that the new Canadian              weak analytical capacity of the Ontario Public Health
Agency for Public Health and the F/P/T Network for               Branch and its limited role in supporting or coordinating
                                                                                                                                o f




Communicable Disease Control must give special priority          the outbreak responses.
to linking research in government and academic institu-
                                                                                                                                R e n e w a l




tions with a focus on infectious diseases. It must build in



..........................................................................................                                 9
                  .................................................................................................

                  Respondents later highlighted weaknesses in systems for        education on infection control, and enhanced linkages
                  communicating infectious disease alerts from public            between public health and segments of the personal
                  health agencies to the operational levels of the health        service system (hospitals, home care agencies, primary
                  system (i.e., hospitals, long-term and home care facilities,   care).
                  ambulance services, family physicians). The process for
                  issuing alerts was apparently more successful in British
                  Columbia, thanks to the provincial Centre for Disease
                                                                                 International Aspects of SARS
                  Control. Post-SARS, clinical and public health leaders in      SARS has illustrated that we are constantly a short flight
                  the Toronto area were unambiguous in supporting an             away from serious epidemics. Strengthening the capacity
                  integrated and regional system of surveillance, reporting,     of other nations to detect and respond to emerging
                  and outbreak management for infectious diseases.               infectious disease is a global responsibility for a country
                                                                                 with Canada’s resources and also a matter of enlightened
                  Physical plant limitations were a particular challenge for     self-interest. The Committee has recommended that the
                  hospitals. Only 3.8% and 1.0% of Toronto/GTA acute             Government of Canada should build health R&D activities
                  and non-acute care hospital beds, respectively, are in         into its programs of international outreach. In particular,
                  single, negative pressure rooms. Of 28 Toronto/GTA             the new Canadian Agency for Public Health should have
                  hospitals with emergency departments, 6 lack infection         a mandate for greater engagement internationally in the
                  control areas. About 18% of monitored intermediate/            emerging infectious disease field, and support projects to
                  critical care beds in Toronto/GTA are equipped for             build capacity for surveillance and outbreak management
                  infection control. Only 30% of hospitals with autopsy          in developing countries.
                  suites reported that their facilities conformed to US CDC
                  guidelines. Furthermore, in early March 2003, just prior       During the SARS epidemic, WHO facilitated collaboration
                  to SARS, medical bed occupancy in Toronto/GTA                  among researchers, promulgated template case definitions,
                  averaged 95%.                                                  and issued various alerts. WHO established contact with
                                                                                 affected countries and offered epidemiologic, laboratory,
                  The impact of provincially-mandated restrictions on            and clinical support. It also began issuing travel advisories
                  hospital activity during SARS I was largest in April, when     for the first time, acting as a trans-national clearinghouse
                  ambulatory procedure volumes dropped 56% in the GTA            to assess the safety of international travel and, by extension,
                  hospitals and 70% in Toronto hospitals, compared to            the effectiveness of outbreak management efforts in
                  April 2002. Levels rebounded in May. The different             different countries.
                  strategy used in SARS II had a much smaller impact on
                  ambulatory procedure volumes, with the GTA hospitals           In June at the WHO Global Meeting on SARS in Malaysia,
                  only 1% below, and Toronto hospitals 5% below the              it became clear that many countries had adopted their
                  prior year. Urgent and emergency surgery volumes were          own case definitions for SARS. The Committee believes
                  maintained. Consultants estimated that the volume of           that further attention is needed to determine the respective
                  deferred elective surgery was over 6,600 inpatient cases       roles of a body such as WHO and its member states in
                  and almost 18,000 ambulatory procedures. More than             defining a new disease such as SARS.
                  half of the inpatient elective surgery backlog occurred in
                  April 2003 during SARS I. The ambulatory procedure             Several Asian jurisdictions faced even greater challenges
                  backlog was even more concentrated, with 85% occurring         from SARS than did Canada. Many observers felt that
                  in April.                                                      Canadian officials failed to connect closely enough with
                                                                                 officials in Hong Kong, Singapore, and China, and missed
                  The Committee’s primary focus is on broad F/P/T                opportunities to learn from other countries.
                  structures, policies, procedures, and funding. However,
S A R S




                  given the very long list of issues that emerged from the       Health Canada regularly transmitted information to
                  specific circumstances of the SARS outbreak, we elected        WHO during the SARS outbreak, but data were limited
                  to make a limited number of recommendations for the            during the early weeks of the outbreak owing to the
                  consideration of P/T ministries of health, health regions      absence of formal reporting processes among municipal,
f r o m




                  and hospitals, and provincial and local public health          provincial, and federal governments. Protocols for data
                  agencies. These recommendations range over matters             sharing must be established not only for more effective
                  such as physical facilities in emergency departments and       outbreak management, but to ensure that Canada can
                  hospitals, regional outbreak management strategies,
L e a r n i n g




                                                                                 maintain the confidence of the international community
                  integrated emergency planning, improved continuing             during an outbreak.




                  10        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

Submissions to the Committee from the travel industry          after the outbreak had waned. The Committee has
indicated significant gaps and inconsistencies with            recommended that the Government of Canada ensure
respect to information on SARS available to passengers         that an adequate complement of quarantine officers is
and staff. The new agency must ensure that there is an         maintained at all ports of entry, and that better collabo-
effective communication strategy for infectious diseases       ration with port authorities and personnel be established
with contact points for the travel industry.                   to clarify responsibilities in the event of a health threat.

On April 2, 2003, WHO issued a travel advisory recom-          Screening of incoming and outbound air passengers
mending the postponement of all but essential travel to        relied on information cards with screening questions and
Hong Kong and China’s Guangdong province. Previously,          secondary assessments as needed, as well as a pilot project
only individual countries had issued travel advisories.        using thermal scanners in Toronto and Vancouver. As of
On April 23, 2003, WHO added Toronto, Beijing, and             August 27, 2003, an estimated 6.5 million screening
China’s Shanxi province to the list of areas that travellers   transactions had occurred at Canadian airports to aid in
should avoid. The advice against non-essential travel to       the detection and prevention of SARS transmission.
Toronto was scheduled to be in place for three weeks           Roughly 9,100 passengers were referred for further
before reappraisal, but withdrawn on April 29 after            assessment by screening nurses or quarantine officers.
Canadian protests. Controversy about the WHO travel            None had SARS. The pilot thermal scanner project
advisory was augmented by inconsistency in categorization      screened about 2.4 million passengers. Only 832 required
of Toronto between WHO and the US CDC, the weak                further assessment, and again none were found to have
evidence for the travel advisory criteria themselves, and      SARS. In other countries, the yields for airport screening
limited warning from WHO of the forthcoming advisory.          measures were similarly low.
Assuming that WHO will continue issuing advisories,
processes for developing evidence-based criteria and           We have accordingly recommended that the Government
giving notice to affected countries must be developed by       of Canada should review its travel screening techniques
agreement among member states.                                 and protocols with a view to ensuring that travel screening
                                                               measures are based on evidence for public health
For many years, Health Canada’s Travel Medicine Program        effectiveness, while taking into account the financial and
has issued advisories to Canadians traveling abroad on         human resources required. While formal screening thus
risks such as disease outbreaks and natural disasters.         far appears relatively inefficient and ineffective, the
Health Canada created its own scoring system to determine      Committee has recommended that the Government of
travel advice concerning countries affected by SARS, but       Canada provide travelers in general with information
its evidentiary basis appears no stronger than the contested   about where and when health threats exist, including




                                                                                                                              C a n a d a
WHO criteria. Moreover, travel advisories issued by            precautionary measures and first steps to take in case
Canada for Hong Kong were at times more severe than            of suspected infection. A partnership with the travel
the WHO travel advice for Hong Kong. The Committee             industry would facilitate this process so that information
has therefore recommended that Canada’s own practices          could be provided at the time of bookings.
in issuing travel advisories should be revisited, ideally in




                                                                                                                              i n
the context of a multilateral re-assessment of the basis,
nature, goals, and impact of advice to travellers.
                                                               Conclusion

                                                                                                                              H e a l t h
                                                               Long before SARS, evidence of actual and potential harm
In 2002, Health Canada informed airport authorities that       to the health of Canadians from weaknesses in public
it would be transferring airport quarantine responsibilities   health infrastructure had been mounting but had not
to the Canada Customs and Revenue Agency. Customs              catalyzed a comprehensive and multi-level governmental
staff were never trained to do the job. During the SARS        response. SARS killed 44 Canadians, caused illness in
outbreak, Health Canada amended the Quarantine Act             hundreds more, paralyzed a major segment of Ontario’s
                                                                                                                              P u b l i c



Regulations to include SARS but only a tiny contingent         health care system for weeks, and saw in excess of
of quarantine officers was on hand to enforce the new          25,000 residents of the GTA placed in quarantine.
regulations. Airport authorities expressed concern about       Psychosocial effects of SARS on health care workers,
Health Canada’s ability to mobilize knowledgeable              patients, and families are still being assessed. However,
quarantine staff to the airports, to provide logistical        the economic shocks have already been felt not only in
                                                                                                                              o f




support, and to manage the relevant communications.            the GTA, the epicenter of SARS, but across the country.
In the case of cruise ships, Health Canada’s protocols for
                                                                                                                              R e n e w a l




screening, handling of suspected SARS cases, and
decontaminating ships were not released until mid-June,


..........................................................................................                              11
                  .................................................................................................

                  The National Advisory Committee on SARS and Public             The SARS story as it unfolded in Canada had both tragic
                  Health has found that there was much to learn from the         and heroic elements. Although the toll of the epidemic
                  outbreak of SARS in Canada—in large part because too           was substantial, thousands in the health field rose to the
                  many earlier lessons were ignored.                             occasion and ultimately contained the SARS outbreak in
                                                                                 this country, notwithstanding systems and resources that
                  A key requirement for dealing successfully with future         were manifestly suboptimal. The challenge now is to
                  public health crises is a truly collaborative framework        ensure not only that we are better prepared for the next
                  and ethos among different levels of government. The            epidemic, but that public health in Canada is broadly
                  rules and norms for a seamless public health system must       renewed so as to protect and promote the health of all
                  be sorted out with a shared commitment to protecting           our present and future citizens.
                  and promoting the health of Canadians. Systems-based
                  thinking and coordination of activity in a carefully-
                  planned infrastructure are integral in public health
                  because of its population-wide and preventive focus.
                  They are also essential if we are to be effective in
                  managing public health emergencies. Indeed, Canada’s
                  ability to contain an outbreak is only as strong as the
                  weakest jurisdiction in the chain of P/T public health
                  systems. Infectious diseases are an essential piece of the
                  public health puzzle, but cannot be addressed in isolation,
                  particularly since in local health units, the same personnel
                  tend to respond to both infectious and non-infectious
                  threats to community health. The Committee has
                  accordingly recommended strategies that will reinforce
                  all levels of the public health system as well as integrate
                  the components more fully with each other.

                  The fiscal and strategic approaches set out in this report
                  are consistent with international precedents and, we
                  believe, the expectations of Canadians. Until now, there
                  have been no federal transfers earmarked for local and
                  P/T public health activities. Public health has instead
                  been competing against personal health services for
                  health dollars in provincial budgets, even as the federal
                  government has increasingly earmarked its health
                  transfers for personal health service priorities. Public
                  health costs are modest—perhaps 2-3% of health
                  spending, depending on how one defines numerators
                  and denominators. The actual amount of new federal
                  spending that the Committee has recommended would
                  reach $700 million per annum by 2007 at the earliest.
                  This is what F/P/T governments currently spend on
                  personal health services in Canada between Monday
                  and Wednesday in a single week.
S A R S
f r o m
L e a r n i n g




                  12        .........................................................................................
                             SARS and Public Health




ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
.................................................................................................



The National Advisory Committee on SARS and Public         Also from Health Canada, Edith Morber, Senior Policy
Health wishes to acknowledge the contributions to our      Advisor, greatly facilitated the Committee’s work with
work by a number of individuals and teams.                 her editorial and synthetic skills and secretariat support.
                                                           Sylvie Ladouceur and Carole Morris provided logistical
Ian Green, Deputy Minister, Health Canada and Scott        support and ensured that Committee meetings ran
Broughton, Assistant Deputy Minister, Population and       smoothly.
Public Health Branch, gave the Committee Chair
unfettered access to Health Canada officials and staff     While the Committee is indebted to these and other
outside of their normal reporting structures.              individuals in Health Canada for their assistance and
                                                           input, we have drawn our own conclusions, as will be
Many individuals in the Population and Public Health       plain from some critical assessments of Health Canada’s
and Health Policy and Communications Branches of           actions, policies, and preparedness for SARS.
Health Canada provided background information and
support critical to the development of the Committee’s     Independent consultants played a key role in the
final report.                                              Committee’s work. Saira David served as a policy and
                                                           research advisor to the Committee, providing valuable
Among those who made direct contributions were:            input. Prof. Sujit Choudhry of the University of Toronto




                                                                                                                         C a n a d a
Ian Shugart, Assistant Deputy Minister, Health Policy      Faculty of Law consulted extensively to the Committee
and Communications Branch; Dr. David Mowat,                on some thorny constitutional and policy issues. We
Director General, Centre for Surveillance Coordination;    have incorporated his work into the report with permission,
Dr. Paul Gully, Senior Director General, Population and    although it should not be assumed that Prof. Choudhry
Public Health Branch; Dr. Ron St John, Director General,   endorses or agrees with all the recommendations and




                                                                                                                         i n
Emergency Preparedness and Response; Dr. Judith            conclusions drawn by the Committee. The Hay Group in
Shamian, Executive Director, Nursing Policy Office;        Toronto undertook a major consultancy on local/regional
Dr. Arlene King, Director, Immunization and Respiratory    clinical and public health issues. Again, we have incor-

                                                                                                                         H e a l t h
Diseases Division; Dr. Ping Yan, Chief, Centre for         porated their outstanding work into the report, but the
Infectious Disease Prevention and Control; Dr. Theresa     Committee takes full responsibility for the findings and
Tam, Medical Specialist; and Claude Giroux, Senior         recommendations.
Policy Advisor.
                                                           Drs. Irfan Dhalla and Jeff Kwong, post-graduate specialty
                                                                                                                         P u b l i c



This senior group of Health Canada employees made          residents in, respectively, Medicine and Community
themselves available for interviews and prepared           Medicine at the University of Toronto, served as tireless
background materials that were very helpful to the         research and editorial associates. They made a major
Committee. All were supported by large teams; some         contribution to the Committee’s work, somehow balancing
also drew on stakeholders for input and advice. Both       these demands with the exigencies of residency training.
                                                                                                                         o f




these senior personnel and the Committee wish to thank
all their team members and the stakeholders who assisted
                                                                                                                         R e n e w a l




them in supporting the Committee’s deliberations.




..........................................................................................                          13
                  .................................................................................................

                  The Committee is particularly appreciative of the front-       These individuals and organizations share fully in credit
                  line health care and public health professionals and           for any meritorious aspects to the report. The
                  administrators who took time out of their busy schedules       Committee accepts responsibility for errors or omissions.
                  to discuss their first-hand experiences combating and
                  containing SARS, and their views on the lessons learned.       Dr. Julie Gerberding, Director of the US Centers for
                  We have generally referenced their comments without            Disease Control [CDC], agreed to participate as a
                  attribution. A few interviewees requested complete             corresponding member and facilitated our access to
                  anonymity; the names of other interviewees are listed in       information about the CDC's operations. On her behalf,
                  an appendix to the report. The Committee extends its           Dr. Marty Cetron attended a Committee meeting and
                  sincere thanks to them all.                                    helped us understand aspects of the CDC's perspectives
                                                                                 on SARS. Dr. David Heymann had also agreed to
                  This report would not have been possible without the           participate as Executive Director of Communicable
                  many excellent submissions received by the Committee           Diseases for the World Health Organization; but was
                  from various non-governmental and private sector               reassigned in July 2003 by the new WHO Director-General,
                  organizations. Not every stakeholder group will find all       Dr. Lee Jong-wook, to be his Representative for Polio
                  its comments or recommendations directly referenced in         Eradication.
                  the report. Similarly, to keep the number of recommen-
                  dations to a manageable and prioritized list, not every        Last, the Committee was mandated to produce an
                  suggestion from the submissions has been transformed           account of key lessons learned from the outbreak of SARS
                  into a Committee recommendation. However, the                  in Canada, particularly as regards measures that must be
                  Committee can warrant that all submissions had an              taken to enhance the public health systems of our nation.
                  influence on our deliberations and recommendations.            We are grateful for the mandate given our members by
                  With a few exceptions, stakeholders kindly agreed to           the Government of Canada and the Hon. Anne McLellan,
                  have their submissions posted electronically for internet      Minister of Health, and hopeful that prompt action will
                  access (see www.sars.gc.ca). We urge interested readers to     be taken by all levels of government, as well as relevant
                  access the important ideas and recommendations of              institutions and stakeholders, to ensure that the health
                  these stakeholders; various of their briefs address issues     of Canadians is protected and promoted even more
                  that could not be covered in this report, and all the briefs   effectively in the years ahead.
                  serve as valuable resources for further study and action.
S A R S
f r o m
L e a r n i n g




                  14        .........................................................................................
                               SARS and Public Health
Chapter 1




INTRODUCTION
.................................................................................................



Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, now known world-            SARS is spread through close contact with an individual
wide by the acronym SARS, is considered to be the “first       who has SARS. The disease has an incubation period that
severe and readily transmissible new disease to emerge in      typically ranges from 2 to 10 days. Affected individuals
the twenty-first century”.1                                    experience fever (>38°C) and later develop respiratory
                                                               symptoms such as cough, shortness of breath, or difficulty
In late February, several guests at the Metropole Hotel in     breathing. Overall, case fatality from progressive
Hong Kong had come in contact with an ill doctor who           respiratory failure ranges from less than 1% of cases for
had been involved in treating patients with an atypical        persons under 24 years of age to 15% of cases for persons
form of pneumonia in Guangdong, China. Those guests            aged 45 to 64 years of age; in persons over the age of 65,
continued their travels in Hong Kong and on to Canada,         the fatality rate can exceed 50%.3 Diagnosis rests partly
Singapore, and Vietnam. They fell ill, and began               on the clinical syndrome, partly on a link to known cases
spreading the disease to others. Many of them died.            of SARS, and partly on a process of exclusion. The virus
This illness was soon identified as severe acute respiratory   can be isolated from respiratory secretions and stool;
syndrome or SARS. As of July 11, 2003 in its daily             however, it is not always detected from these sources
summary, the World Health Organization [WHO]                   even in patients with probable SARS. Serological tests
reported 8,437 probable cases of SARS and 813 deaths           based on the body’s immune response to SARS are also
worldwide, and the toll has since risen to about 900 as        helpful, but these tests do not begin to yield useful




                                                                                                                            C a n a d a
some previously-ill individuals have succumbed.                information until a few weeks after the onset of symptoms.
                                                               No vaccine or cure currently exists leaving clinicians to
Canada, like other countries, faced an intense battle to       rely primarily on supportive measures and public health
control SARS. Public health and health care personnel          authorities to rely on isolation and quarantine as the
worked tirelessly to contain the outbreak within systems       predominant measures to control SARS.
that were often seriously inadequate to the task.




                                                                                                                            i n
Citizens were also impressively calm and cooperative,
notwithstanding innumerable disruptions to their               Emerging and Re-emerging

                                                                                                                            H e a l t h
working lives and quarantine requirements that affected        Infectious Diseases
thousands.
                                                               Emerging infectious diseases are diseases that are
SARS was and remains a challenge to diagnose and               newly identified, or that have existed previously but
manage because its symptoms resemble those of many             are increasing in incidence or geographic range.4
                                                                                                                            P u b l i c



other respiratory infections. Thus far, extensive research     SARS is the most recent example of a new or otherwise
by a WHO-coordinated international network of research         unknown disease. Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease,
centres has identified a novel coronavirus as the              discovered in 1996 and considered to be the same
presumed cause of SARS. The diagnostic tests available to      agent as that causing bovine spongiform encephalitis
test for the SARS coronavirus have limitations with respect    in cattle, is another example. Since 1973, more than
                                                                                                                            o f




to their reliability and sensitivity, and more research is     30 previously unknown diseases associated with
needed to enable the rapid identification and                  viruses and bacteria have emerged. Examples include:
                                                                                                                            R e n e w a l




characterization of this new coronavirus.2                     Ebola virus (1977); Legionnaire’s disease (1977);




..........................................................................................                            15
                  .................................................................................................

                  E. coli 0157:H7-associated hemolytic uremic syndrome            HIV provides a good example of how such factors have
                  (1982); HIV/AIDS (1983); Hepatitis C (1989); and                led to the emergence of infectious diseases. HIV is
                  H5N1 Influenza A or avian flu (1997).5                          believed to have had a zoonotic origin. Ecological factors
                                                                                  such as deforestation and land development would have
                  West Nile virus infection is an example of a previously         increased human exposure to the animal host. Social
                  known disease that has increased its geographic range.          events such as population growth and migration played a
                  The discovery of West Nile virus in the USA in 1999 marked      role in increasing the opportunity for HIV transmission
                  the first introduction in recent history of an Old World        to other humans. Sexual behaviour, use of illicit drugs
                  flavivirus into the New World.6 West Nile virus was             by injection, and iatrogenic causes (e.g., the early spread
                  discovered in the West Nile district of Uganda in 1937.         of HIV through blood transfusions and blood products)
                  In the last decade, human outbreaks of West Nile have           provided added advantages for the continued and
                  increased in the Middle East and Europe, suggesting the         accelerated transmission of HIV.12 Bovine spongiform
                  evolution of a new West Nile virus variant.7 West Nile          encephalopathy and hemolytic uremic syndrome caused
                  virus arrived in Canada in 2001, found in dead birds and        by E. coli 0157:H7 (commonly known as hamburger
                  mosquito pools in Ontario. The first human cases of             sickness) are examples of diseases that emerged as a result
                  infection occurred in 2002. In 2002, West Nile virus was        of changes in food production.13
                  found in five provinces: Nova Scotia, Quebec, Ontario,
                  Manitoba, and Saskatchewan, with Quebec and Ontario             Factors that exacerbate the emergence and re-emergence
                  having confirmed cases of human infection.8 On August           of infectious diseases, and that present challenges in
                  12, 2003, Alberta reported its first case of West Nile virus,   dealing with outbreaks, are globalization and deficiencies
                  a young woman who likely contracted the disease while           in public health infrastructure.
                  camping in Southern Alberta.9 Federal and provincial
                  governments all have action plans to reduce the spread
                  of the virus.
                                                                                  Globalization and Communicable
                                                                                  Disease
                  Re-emerging infectious diseases are known diseases
                  previously considered under control and no longer               Globalization has made our world smaller as people and
                  considered a public health problem, but that have               goods move more freely and more frequently around the
                  reappeared or are causing an increased number of                globe. As the world becomes more interconnected, the
                  infections.10 Some examples include: the reappearance           opportunities for rapid and effective disease spread increase.
                  of epidemic cholera in the Americas in 1991; dengue             And as was seen with SARS, travel plays a pivotal role in
                  fever in the Americas in the 1990s; diphtheria in the           the rapid dissemination of disease. According to World
                  Russian Federation and other republics of the former            Tourism Organization data14, approximately 715 million
                  Soviet Union in 1994; the increase in the occurrence            international tourist arrivals were registered at borders in
                  of meningococcal meningitis in Sub-Saharan Africa               2002 (preliminary data). Human migration has been a
                  since the mid-1990s; and Yellow fever in Africa and             key means for infectious disease transmission throughout
                  South America since the mid-1980s. Tuberculosis may             recorded history. However, the volume, speed, and reach
                  be considered in this category in some respects.                of travel today have accelerated the spread of infectious
                  Tuberculosis has remained a public health problem for           diseases.15 The rapidity of movement from one country
                  vulnerable populations. Its toll has increased with             to another or one continent to another falls well within
                  urban crowding and poverty in developing and                    the incubation period of virtually all infectious diseases.
                  developed nations, with the advent of the HIV                   Disease emergence is nonetheless complex, and the
                  pandemic, and with the emergence of strains of drug-            conditions for a disease-causing organism must be right
                  resistant tuberculosis bacteria.                                in order for it to survive, proliferate, and find a way to
S A R S




                                                                                  enter a susceptible host.16 SARS, thought to be spread
                  Many of the pathogens believed to cause infectious diseases     through droplet nuclei and close physical contact, proved
                  are already present in the environment. Activities that         to be a disease easily carried to any part of the world.
                  increase microbial traffic between people and their environ-
f r o m




                  ments promote emergence and epidemics.11 Among the
                  factors precipitating the emergence and re-emergence of
                  infectious diseases are: ecological changes (including
                  those due to economic development and land use);
L e a r n i n g




                  human demographics and behaviour; technology and
                  industry; and microbial adaptation and change.



                  16        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

The globalization of the food (and feed) trade, while         involved staff, and to ensure availability of contemporary
offering many benefits and opportunities, also presents       information on surveillance and control of infectious
new risks. Because food production, manufacturing, and        diseases.
marketing are now global, infectious agents can be
disseminated from the original point of processing and        Within WHO, the Department of Communicable Disease
packaging to locations thousands of miles away.17             Surveillance and Response [CSR] is responsible for
                                                              realizing this mandate. It envisages that “every country
Emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases are a            should be able to detect, verify rapidly and respond
permanent fixture on the public health landscape at the       appropriately to epidemic-prone and emerging disease
local, regional, national, and international levels. People   threats when they arise to minimize their impact on the
will continue to travel and migrate; goods will continue      health and economy of the world’s population.”
to be traded. In order to mitigate the incidence and
effects of infectious diseases, therefore, communication      The CSR’s three strategic directions are to contain known
at all levels and local responses to infectious diseases      risks, respond to the unexpected, and improve
must be enhanced.                                             preparedness. Activities include tracking emerging
                                                              infectious diseases, sounding an alarm when necessary,
Compounding the challenges of dealing with emerging           sharing information on emerging diseases and disease
and re-emerging infectious diseases is the threat of the      outbreaks, and providing assistance to affected states in
accidental or intentional release of biological agents. The   the form of technical assistance, supplies, and in some
events of September 11, 2001 and the intentional release      cases, international investigations/responses.
of anthrax spores that immediately followed in the USA,
make the possibility of the accidental or intentional         WHO emphasizes that global surveillance and strong public
release of a biological agent a disturbing reality and a      health systems are needed to respond to emerging and
threat to global security. International cooperation has      re-emerging infectious diseases, and possible bioterrorism
been required to prepare for such events.                     events. As mentioned earlier, WHO is currently revising its
                                                              International Health Regulations which set out to “ensure
Working collaboratively with international bodies is also     the maximum security against the international spread of
a key component to dealing effectively with infectious        diseases with minimum interference with world traffic.”
diseases. Canada is in regular contact with the World         From WHO’s perspective, the worldwide SARS outbreak
Health Organization [WHO] and the US Centers for              has underscored the need for these revised regulations.18
Disease Control and Prevention [CDC] in its day-to-day
business of conducting disease surveillance.
                                                              US Centers for Disease Control




                                                                                                                               C a n a d a
The World Health Organization                                 and Prevention [CDC]
[WHO]                                                         The CDC is the lead federal agency in the USA for
                                                              protecting the health and safety of its citizens, and is part
WHO is the United Nations’ specialized agency for health      of the Department of Health and Human Services. It




                                                                                                                               i n
whose objective is the “attainment by all peoples of the      serves as the national focus for developing and applying
highest possible level of health.” In 2001, the World         disease prevention and control, environmental health,


                                                                                                                               H e a l t h
Health Assembly, made up of 192 member states, adopted        and health promotion and education activities with
a resolution on “Global health security: Epidemic alert       respect to health. CDC was originally established as the
and response,” in recognition of the threats to public        US ‘Communicable Diseases Center’ after the Second World
health posed by epidemic-prone and emerging infections,       War. The continuation of the acronym CDC (minus the
and bioterrorism. That resolution expressed support for       P for prevention) and public image of the agency as an
                                                                                                                               P u b l i c



ongoing work on the revision of the International Health      outbreak-fighting organization both tend to mask the
Regulations, the development of a global strategy for         extent to which CDC now serves broad public health
infectious disease containment and the prevention of          functions in the USA. The agency employs approximately
antimicrobial resistance, and collaboration between WHO       8,500 employees working in 170 occupations in various
and technical partners in the area of epidemic alert and      locations, including in CDC facilities around the USA, in
                                                                                                                               o f




response. It also urged members to participate actively in    other countries, in quarantine offices, and in state and
surveillance activities related to health emergencies of      local health agencies. It is made up of 12 centres, institutes
                                                                                                                               R e n e w a l




international concern, to develop and update national         and offices, one of which is the National Center for
preparation and response plans, to develop training for       Infectious Diseases [NCID].



..........................................................................................                              17
                  .................................................................................................

                  The NCID’s mandate is “to prevent illness, disability, and
                  death caused by infectious diseases in the United States
                                                                                 Emergency Preparedness
                  and around the world.” It accomplishes this by conducting      The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 in the USA
                  surveillance, epidemic investigations, epidemiologic and       underscored the necessity of local, regional, and national
                  laboratory research, training, and public education            preparedness for any emergency. New York City [NYC]
                  programs to develop, evaluate, and promote prevention          saw the benefits of forward planning when a case of
                  and control strategies for infectious diseases. NCID staff     exposure to anthrax, found on October 9, 2001, was
                  work in partnership with local and state public health         successfully handled. NYC was in the process of
                  officials, other federal agencies, medical and public health   developing protocols for mass antibiotic prophylaxis
                  professional associations, infectious disease experts from     against anthrax in 1999, and had also established an
                  academic and clinical practice, and international and          incident command structure of which NYC government
                  public service organizations. The NCID also works              agencies are part. This command structure includes the
                  closely with other Centers within the CDC such as the          following components: clinical response, sheltering,
                  Public Health Practice Program Office, the Office of           surveillance, environmental health, laboratory,
                  Global Health, and the Epidemiology Program Office             communications, management information systems, and
                  among others.                                                  physical plant operations. Each component is operated
                                                                                 by staff from a variety of the city’s Department of Health
                  Like many other countries, the USA is in the process of        programs. NYC’s command system swung into high gear
                  improving its national capacities for disease surveillance,    the moment the anthrax exposure case was identified.
                  prevention, and control. It has developed a strategic          An antibiotic distribution site was established, and work
                  plan for preventing emerging infectious diseases, the          began on administering antibiotics and determining the
                  pillars of which are surveillance and response, applied        source of the anthrax and who might have been exposed.
                  research, infrastructure and training, and prevention and
                  control. The CDC seeks to improve epidemiologic                The success of this operation was attributed to four “C’s”,
                  capacity, surge capacity, communications, and the supply       i.e., clarity of mission, lines of authority, and responsi-
                  of appropriate and adequate equipment and training.19          bilities; communication; collaboration among federal, state
                                                                                 and local public health officials, and law enforcement
                  A “CDC North”?                                                 officials; and coordination of staffing and supplies.20

                  The experience of the SARS outbreak has renewed calls          Federal/provincial/territorial Ministries of Health have
                  for a Canadian version of the US Centers for Disease           made progress in their emergency preparedness and
                  Control and Prevention to improve coordination of              responses plans since September 11, 2001, and are
                  public health across Canada, champion public health            working collaboratively towards a seamless pan-Canadian
                  initiatives nationally, and direct the operations of a         health emergency management system. However, the
                  national disease control body. These calls are based on        SARS outbreak demonstrated that more needs to be done
                  the premise that public health threats such as SARS are        to integrate the public health and emergency response
                  national issues that need a coordinated response from          systems in times of crisis. We cannot say, with
                  both public health and emergency response systems,             confidence, that the factors that contributed to NYC’s
                  with appropriate support at the federal level. They are        successful handling of its anthrax incident were in place
                  also based on the limitations in response capacity as well     to handle Canada’s SARS outbreak.
                  as issues with coordination and communication that
                  were highlighted during the battle to control SARS in
                  Canada. The National Advisory Committee on SARS and
S A R S




                  Public Health has taken a key part of its mandate to be
                  the assessment of options for enhancing our response
                  capacity to health crises, particularly outbreaks of
                  emerging infectious diseases such as SARS.
f r o m
L e a r n i n g




                  18        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


The State of Canada’s Public                                   Federal/Provincial/Territorial
Health System                                                  Structures and Linkages
The public health system, unlike the clinical or personal      Canada’s Constitution provides both the federal and
health services system, tends to operate in the back-          provincial/territorial governments with elements of
ground, little known to most Canadians unless there is         legislative authority over health. The primary federal
an unexpected outbreak of disease. However, the public         acts governing public health and infectious diseases are
health system has many essential roles. These include          the Department of Health Act which provides powers
health protection, disease and injury prevention, and          related to disease surveillance and the “protection of the
health promotion, along with time-honoured funda-              people of Canada against the risks to health and the
mentals such as access to safe foods, safe drinking water,     spreading of diseases” and the Quarantine Act. Provincial
and proper sanitation systems. An effective public health      and territorial governments have regulations with respect
system is essential to preserve and enhance the health         to reportable diseases requiring special attention and
status of Canadians, to reduce health disparities, and to      measures. All jurisdictions have legislation governing
reduce the costs of curative health services. While public     emergencies which generally cover infectious disease
health activities may evolve as a result of changing           epidemics and other situations that would present a
technology and needs, the goals remain the same: to            serious public health threat.
reduce the amount of disease, premature death, and pain
and suffering in the population.                               The federal government supports health care through the
                                                               Canada Health and Social Transfer [CHST] which provides
Public health has the health of populations as its priority.   provinces and territories with cash payments and tax
The population approach recognizes that the health of          transfers to apply as they see fit to their health and social
populations and individuals is shaped by a wide range of       programs. From time to time, the federal government
factors in the social, economic, natural, built, and           also provides funding for specific health initiatives, most
political environments. In turn, these factors interact in     recently primary or home care. Provincial and territorial
complex ways with each other and with innate individual        governments provide funding to their respective health
traits such as sex and genetics. Such a broad perspective      authorities predominantly through grants. In Ontario,
on health takes into account the potential effects of social   municipalities share a 50% responsibility for the funding
connectedness, economic inequality, social norms, and          of most local public health programs. In 2002, approxi-
public policies on health-related behaviours and on            mately $79.354 billion was spent on health by the federal,
health status.                                                 provincial, territorial, and municipal governments.




                                                                                                                               C a n a d a
                                                               There is no standardized definition of public health, and
The Walkerton, Ontario E. coli outbreak in May 2000            it is therefore difficult to obtain a precise estimate of
and the North Battleford, Saskatchewan outbreak of             what is spent on public health. However, in rough
Cryptosporidium parvum in April 2001 demonstrate how           terms, spending on personal health services is about
breakdowns in infrastructure lead to public health crises.     thirty-fold greater than public health spending.
A recent comparative study of the Walkerton and North




                                                                                                                               i n
Battleford outbreaks conducted by Woo and Vicente              Only weak mechanisms exist in public health for collab-
concludes that both accidents resulted from a complex          orative decision making or systematic data sharing across


                                                                                                                               H e a l t h
interaction among factors at multiple levels ranging           governments. Furthermore, governments have not
from inadequate supervision, compliancy failure, and           adequately sorted out their roles and responsibilities
complacency on the part of regulatory bodies, to               during a national health crisis. Each level of government,
provincial budget cutbacks.21                                  from local to federal must collaborate if Canada is to
                                                               achieve a seamless, integrated approach to public health
                                                                                                                               P u b l i c


A more cohesive, comprehensive approach to public              and to managing health crises. The SARS outbreak has
health must form the basis for a sustainable public health     highlighted many areas where inter-jurisdictional collab-
system. This means cooperation not only across                 oration is suboptimal; so far from being seamless, the
governments but also within governments, and involves          public health system showed a number of serious gaps.
the private sector, non-governmental organizations, and
                                                                                                                               o f




the public. This is no easy task.
                                                                                                                               R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                              19
                  .................................................................................................

                                                                                  Having the SARS outbreaks occur in Canada’s largest city
                  Canada’s SARS Experience                                        presented many challenges. However, it may have been
                  After China and Hong Kong, Toronto was the region               fortuitous that SARS struck Toronto and not a less-
                  hardest hit by SARS. As of August 12, 2003, there had           advantaged region of the country. Few rural and small
                  been 438 probable and suspect SARS cases in Canada,             urban hospitals have resident specialists in infectious
                  including 44 deaths. The majority of SARS cases have            disease; infection control officers/nurses are often part-
                  been concentrated in Ontario and all deaths have                time, and include infection control among a number of
                  occurred in Toronto. The toll on health care workers has        somewhat unrelated functions such as nursing super-
                  been especially high: more than 100 fell ill with               vision or occupational health. In smaller jurisdictions,
                  probable SARS and three succumbed.                              communicable disease investigation and control falls to
                                                                                  public health nurses and inspectors with at most one
                  SARS placed heavy pressures on Toronto’s public health          physician, who may or may not be fully trained in public
                  and health care system. The region’s health care                health, to provide back-up and oversight. Multi-tasking
                  professionals, as front-line workers vital to controlling the   across a wide range of activities from well baby and
                  disease, were at heightened risk for contracting the disease,   immunization to community development is the rule in
                  and under considerable physical and psychological stress.       rural public health units, with very limited specialization
                  Many patients required intensive care, hospitals had to         of functions. How can we strengthen the public health
                  close, elective procedures were cancelled, and procuring        system to ensure that it can meet the unique challenges
                  adequate types and quantities of supplies to combat the         of both major metropolitan areas and smaller or rural
                  disease was difficult. SARS also placed unprecedented           communities?
                  demands on the public health system, challenging
                  regional capacity for outbreak containment, surveillance,       Learning from SARS
                  information management, and infection control.
                                                                                  The lessons learned from SARS are critical pieces of
                  While the public health and health care workers involved        information for determining the improvements needed
                  did an admirable job of containing SARS and keeping it          in Canada’s public health system. Enhancement of
                  from spreading to the larger community, the SARS                surveillance mechanisms, better coordination among the
                  experience highlighted weaknesses in Canada’s public            various levels of government and institutions for outbreak
                  health system. Many issues to do with the clinical system       containment, improved public communications strate-
                  and clinical/public health interface were also thrown into      gies, and major increases in expert human resources are
                  high relief. Aside from the lack of surge capacity to deal      just some of the changes needed if Canada is to be better
                  with this crisis situation, problems emerged with respect       prepared for future health crises.
                  to timely access to laboratory results, information sharing,
                  data ownership, and epidemiologic investigation of the          SARS resulted in a tragic loss of life, grieving families and
                  outbreak. Communication to the public was sometimes             friends, tremendous dislocation to the health system,
                  inconsistent, and it was not always clear who was in            and economic turmoil. Fortunately, SARS was only
                  charge of the outbreak response.                                moderately contagious and did not turn into a full-blown
                                                                                  pandemic. In Canada, the outbreak was primarily
                  The SARS experience illustrated that Canada is not              centred in a major urban area with unparalleled health
                  adequately prepared to deal with a true pandemic. The           care resources. Nonetheless, it severely tested local,
                  Ontario government has similarly emphasized that                federal, and provincial capacity to deal with the outbreak,
                  Ontario’s public health system could not have withstood         illuminating the strengths and deficiencies of the existing
                  two simultaneous large-scale outbreaks or crises such as        public health and health care systems. The knowledge
S A R S




                  SARS.22 It is unlikely that most other provinces are in a       gained from battling SARS should help Canada put in
                  better position, and the federal capacity to support            place a public health system that will be capable of not
                  one or more provinces facing simultaneous health crises         only dealing with the next outbreak, but the next
                  is limited.                                                     pandemic.
f r o m
L e a r n i n g




                  20        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

There is no time for complacency. SARS has been                  15. Wilson, Mary E., “Travel and the Emergence of
subdued, perhaps only temporarily, and the fall season of            Infectious Disease,” EID, Vol. 1(2), April-June 1999.
respiratory illnesses will soon be upon Canada. The work
                                                                 16. Ibid.
to improve the public health system and prepare the
clinical services system must begin apace.                       17. Käferstein, F.K. et al., “Foodborne Disease Control:
                                                                     A Transnational Challenge,” EID, Vol. 3(4),
                                                                     Oct.-Dec. 1997.
References
                                                                 18. Associated Press, May 27, 2003.
1.   World Health Organization, “Severe Acute Respiratory
     Syndrome (SARS): Status of the Outbreak and                 19. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
     Lessons for the Immediate Future,” SARS technical               website, www.cdc.gov.
     briefing, WHA 56, 20 May 2003.                              20. Blank, Susan, et al., “An Ounce of Prevention is a
2.   World Health Organization Multicentre Collaborative             Ton of Work: Mass Antibiotic Prophylaxis for
     Network for SARS Diagnosis, “A Multicentre                      Anthrax, New York City, 2001,” EID, Vol. 9 (6),
     Collaboration to Investigate the Cause of Severe                June 2003.
     Acute Respiratory Syndrome,” The Lancet, Vol. 361,          21. Woo, Dennis and Vicente, Kim, “Sociotechnical
     May 17, 2003, 1730-33.                                          Systems, Risk Management, and Public Health:
3.   SARS Conference, 17 June 2003.                                  Comparing the North Battleford and Walkerton
                                                                     Outbreaks,” Reliability Engineering and Systems Safety,
4.   Morse, Stephen S., “Factors in the Emergence of                 Vol. 80, 2003.
     Infectious Diseases,” EID, Vol. 1, No.1, Jan-March 1995;“
     Will it Reach On Time? Emerging and Re-emerging             22. Houpt, Simon, “U.S. Got lucky, SARS Experts Agree,”
     Infectious Diseases,” UN Chronicle, Vol.36, No.1, 1999.         Globe and Mail, June 13, 2003.

5.   World Health Organization, “Emerging and
     Re-Emerging Infectious Diseases,” WHO Fact Sheet
     No.97, August 1998.
6.   Peterson ,L.R and Roehrig, John T., “West Nile Virus:
     Re-emerging Global Pathogen, EID, Vol. 7, No.4,
     July-Aug 2001.
7.   Ibid.




                                                                                                                                 C a n a d a
8.   Health Canada SARS website,
     http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/pphb-dgspsp/sars-sras.
9.   Globe and Mail, August 12, 2003, Page A7.
10. World Health Organization, “Emerging and




                                                                                                                                 i n
    Re-emerging Infectious Diseases,” WHO Fact Sheet
    No. 97, August 1998.


                                                                                                                                 H e a l t h
11. Morse, Stephen S., et al, “Factors in the Emergence
    of Infectious Diseases,” EID, Vol. 1, No. 1.,
    Jan-March 1995.
12. Ibid.
                                                                                                                                 P u b l i c



13. Ibid.
14. World Tourism Organization, “World Tourism 2002:
    Better than Expected,” Press release, January 27, 2003.
                                                                                                                                 o f
                                                                                                                                 R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                                  21
                                       SARS and Public Health
Chapter 2



SARS IN CANADA:
Anatomy of an Outbreak
.................................................................................................



Through the ages humans have relied on animals for                                We have minimized the use of names throughout the
food, labour, companionship, and entertainment.                                   account for participants and interviewees. Other reviews
However, our interactions with animals have infected                              underway, particularly the Ontario Public Health
humans with numerous communicable diseases. It now                                Investigation by Mr. Justice Archie Campbell, have the
appears that exotic animals in a Guangdong market—                                time and mandate to dissect specific events in detail.
perhaps civet cats or raccoon dogs—may have given the                             Most of the salient issues are adequately framed by the
human race yet another novel infectious disease: severe                           first wave of SARS in Canada, and the account focuses
acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS.                                              more on “SARS I”, recognizing that Mr. Justice Campbell’s
                                                                                  mandate arose in meaningful measure from events
Old diseases usually spread slowly. Smallpox, for                                 around the second wave or “SARS II”. Nonetheless, we
example, was a scourge in Europe for thousands of years                           do track the outbreak through to containment in June
before it finally crossed the Atlantic with Christopher                           2003. Future historians will be able to describe these
Columbus and his men. SARS, on the other hand,                                    events with greater accuracy, a wider international
moved at the speed of a jet airplane. Within days of its                          perspective, and the benefit of longer hindsight.
arrival in Hong Kong, it had circled the globe.

This chapter provides a brief overview of the SARS
                                                                                  2A. A New Disease in Guangdong




                                                                                                                                                              C a n a d a
outbreak in Canada. The SARS story is one in which                                        (November 27, 2002 - February 22, 2003)
thousands of front-line public health and health care
                                                                                        “Have you heard of an epidemic in Guangzhou? An
workers rose brilliantly and often heroically to the
                                                                                        acquaintance of mine from a teachers’ [Internet]
occasion to contain an outbreak, despite systems that
                                                                                        chat room lives there and reports that the hospitals
were often seriously inadequate to the task. We found,
                                                                                        there have been closed and people are dying.”




                                                                                                                                                              i n
not surprisingly, that individual and organizational
perspectives on the same events during the outbreak
                                                                                        —Dr. Stephen Cunnion (posted on ProMED-mail on
often differed sharply. Further, although new


                                                                                                                                                              H e a l t h
                                                                                         February 10, 2003)
information continuously emerged, it increasingly had
more to do with retrospective second-guessing of
                                                                                  On February 14, 2003, the World Health Organization
decisions by individuals than with forward-looking
                                                                                  [WHO] reported in its weekly newsletter that an unusual
enhancements to the public health and health care
                                                                                  acute respiratory illness had claimed five lives since the
systems. This truncated account is designed simply to
                                                                                                                                                              P u b l i c


                                                                                  previous November in Guangdong Province, China.
remind Canadians of how the SARS outbreak unfolded,
                                                                                  Three hundred more people—about one-third of them
and touches on some key issues that surface from even a
                                                                                  health care workers—were reported to have been
cursory review of four extraordinary months in the
                                                                                  infected. Six days later, the Chinese Ministry of Health
history of Canadian public health and health care.
                                                                                  informed the WHO that the cause of the illness was a
                                                                                  common bacterium, Chlamydia pneumoniae.1
                                                                                                                                                              o f




1 Chlamydia pneumoniae is an obligate intracellular bacterium—it depends on and lives within a host cell. Most adults will be infected by
                                                                                                                                                              R e n e w a l




  C. pneumoniae at some point in their lives. Infections result in respiratory illness of varying severity, and can be effectively treated with widely
  available antibiotics.



..........................................................................................                                                               23
                  .................................................................................................

                  More than two months before, Health Canada’s Global                              specialists, and public health authorities to be alert for
                  Public Health Intelligence Network [GPHIN] received a                            influenza-like symptoms in travellers returning from
                  Chinese-language news report of a flu outbreak in                                China. Toronto public health officials sent out similar
                  mainland China. GPHIN is an early-warning system that                            information about severe ‘flu’ in younger adults to a list
                  continuously scans Internet media sources for reports of                         of infectious disease and emergency room physicians in
                  infectious disease outbreaks around the world. The                               Toronto on February 20, and the Provincial Public Health
                  Chinese report, published on November 27, 2002, was                              Branch circularized health units to the same effect on
                  sent to WHO with an English header. The full report was                          February 21.
                  never translated. Health Canada officials became aware
                  of the new disease along with the rest of the world in                           Meanwhile, the chain of events that would bring SARS to
                  February 2003.                                                                   Canada began. A 65-year-old doctor who had treated
                                                                                                   atypical pneumonia patients in Guangdong travelled to
                  Health Canada publicized the Guangdong outbreak in its                           Hong Kong to attend his nephew’s wedding. By the time
                  next FluWatch bulletin,2 which summarized influenza                              he checked into the Metropole Hotel, he was feeling
                  activity between February 9 and 15, 2003. The following                          unwell. The doctor infected at least 12 other guests and
                  week, FluWatch reported that Chinese authorities                                 visitors from several countries, including a 78-year-old
                  claimed the Guangdong outbreak was over.                                         woman from Canada, Mrs. K S-C.

                  Concurrently, officials in Hong Kong reported a case of
                  avian influenza. On February 19, 2003, during a regular                             D   I S C U S S I O N                       P O I N T
                  conference call with Health Canada’s Pandemic Influenza                             The Canadian Hospital Epidemiology Committee advised
                  Committee, federal officials recommended that all                                   the Committee that Canada lacks a coordinated system
                  provinces be vigilant for influenza-like illnesses in                               to “notify acute care facilities of a global health alert,
                  returning travellers, particularly those returning from                             with attendant recommendations for surveillance and
                  Hong Kong or China. Health Canada also issued written                               control” if persons suspected of having a new infectious
                  alerts on February 20 and 21 to the Pandemic Influenza                              disease “appear in Canadian health care facilities.”
                  Committee, the Council of the Chief Medical Officers of                             Relevant information was sent out in Ontario, but the
                  Health, the Canadian Public Health Laboratory Network,                              lines of accountability for alerts appear blurred, and key
                  the FluWatch network (including hospital infection                                  target groups commented that they had no prior warning
                  control practitioners), and veterinarians, warning all                              of a new respiratory virus from Asia. Does Canada have
                  recipients to be alert for avian flu. Some representatives                          an adequate system to detect emerging diseases world-
                  on the Pandemic Influenza Committee expressed                                       wide or even within its borders? Once an outbreak is
                  concerns that Health Canada should not be dealing                                   detected, what kind of communication structure would
                  directly with hospital infection control practitioners.                             work best to get information to public health officials,
                                                                                                      infection control specialists, emergency departments
                  Around this time, ProMED-mail, an Internet-based                                    and ultimately to front-line health care workers—and
                  reporting system that, like GPHIN, provides early warnings                          ensure that appropriate responses are occurring?
                  of infectious disease outbreaks, was alerting its audience
                  that the mysterious respiratory ailment in Guangdong
                  might not be caused by Chlamydia pneumoniae after all—
                  tests found the bacteria in only two of the deceased
                                                                                                   2B. From Kowloon to Scarborough
                  patients’ tissue samples.                                                                (February 23, 2003 - March 12, 2003)
                                                                                                   Mrs. K returned to Toronto on February 23, 2003 after a
                  The combination of the two outbreaks—avian flu and the
S A R S




                                                                                                   10-day trip to Hong Kong. During her holiday, she spent
                  mystery disease—raised concern among staff at the
                                                                                                   three nights at the Metropole Hotel in Kowloon where
                  British Columbia Centre for Disease Control, and its
                                                                                                   she briefly encountered the Guangdong doctor. Two
                  officials issued the first of three broadcast e-mails on
                                                                                                   days after arriving in Toronto, Mrs. K developed a high
                  February 20, informing doctors, infection control
f r o m




                                                                                                   fever, and by the time she visited her family doctor on


                  2 FluWatch reports are posted on Health Canada’s website weekly during the influenza season (September to April) and biweekly during the rest of
                    the year. Prior to Internet publication, Health Canada sends the reports by e-mail or fax to provincial and territorial FluWatch representatives, the
L e a r n i n g




                    Pandemic Influenza Committee, a 250-doctor strong network of sentinel physicians, the College of Family Physicians of Canada, hospital infection
                    control practitioners, WHO and the Pan-American Health Organization [PAHO], the CDC and several federal government departments
                    (e.g., Department of National Defence).



                  24           .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

February 28, she was also complaining of muscle aches
and a dry cough. Mrs. K’s condition continued to                D   I S C U S S I O N               P O I N T
deteriorate, and she died at home on March 5, 2003.
                                                                The SARS outbreak threw into high relief the state of
Family members did not want an autopsy and the
                                                                Canadian emergency departments—the point of first
coroner thought it unnecessary. On the death certificate,
                                                                contact for the sickest patients. As the Canadian
the coroner listed heart attack as the cause of death.
                                                                Association of Emergency Physicians noted in its
                                                                submission to the Committee, there are no national
On March 7, 2003 two days after his mother’s death, Mrs.
                                                                standards addressing emergency department design or
K’s 44-year old son, T C-K arrived at The Scarborough
                                                                operation, most departments lack adequate isolation
Hospital, Grace Division emergency department. He
                                                                facilities, staff may not be trained in infection control
complained of a high fever, a severe cough, and difficulty
                                                                procedures, and “the current practice of housing large
breathing. He shared the open observation ward of a
                                                                numbers of sick admitted patients for prolonged times
busy emergency department for 18 to 20 hours while
                                                                in open, densely-populated emergency departments is a
awaiting admission. Only curtains separated him from
                                                                potential public health hazard.” These phenomena
nearby patients. By the next day, Mr. T’s condition had
                                                                reflect not only upon the funding and organization of
deteriorated sufficiently that he was admitted to the
                                                                emergency departments, but also the continued shortfall
Intensive Care Unit [ICU], and eventually required
                                                                in ambulatory care capacity, and the need for primary
intubation—doctors inserted a tube through his mouth
                                                                care reform.
into his trachea, and attached it to a ventilator to help
his breathing.
                                                               The new disease spread to other countries. An American
The physician who treated Mr. T was a respirologist and        businessman who also had stayed at the Metropole Hotel
intensive care specialist who astutely suspected               flew to Hanoi, Vietnam. Feeling unwell, he visited a
tuberculosis. He had not received any information about        local hospital on February 26, 2003 where over the next
the mysterious respiratory illness in Guangdong. With          few days, several nurses also became ill. The hospital
tuberculosis a possibility, he isolated Mr. T, and asked the   called the local WHO office, and Dr. Carlo Urbani was
rest of the family to isolate themselves at home. He           sent to investigate. On February 28, he informed the
contacted Toronto Public Health. As per the usual              regional WHO office of the respiratory disease cluster.
protocol for tuberculosis, public health officials contacted   On March 6, 2003, still unable to determine the cause of
the family, and made arrangements for chest x-rays and         the Hanoi outbreak, he placed a direct call to the WHO
tuberculosis skin tests. According to Toronto Public           head office in Geneva. Dr. Urbani began to experience
Health officials, none of the family members reported          symptoms himself on March 11, and died 18 days later.




                                                                                                                             C a n a d a
feeling unwell.                                                His alarm helped contain the Vietnam outbreak.

Many patients and staff were exposed to Mr. T before he        Meanwhile, in Hong Kong, several dozen health care
was placed in isolation, and two of the patients being         workers at the Prince of Wales Hospital were beginning
treated in the Grace emergency department at the same          to show symptoms. Twenty-three were admitted to an
                                                               isolation ward on March 11, 2003.




                                                                                                                             i n
time would also fall ill. Partly due to hospital
overcrowding, Mr. T remained in the emergency
department long after doctors had authorized a hospital        On March 12, 2003, WHO issued a global alert regarding


                                                                                                                             H e a l t h
admission. While waiting for a bed to be freed up, Mr. T       the mystery illness (soon to be called the severe acute
received oxygen and vaporized medications (potentially         respiratory syndrome, or SARS) that was occurring
capable of transforming infectious droplets into an            primarily among health care workers in Hanoi and Hong
infectious aerosol), and had numerous visitors.                Kong. Physicians at several hospitals in Toronto involved
                                                               in the first wave of the outbreak later advised that they
                                                                                                                             P u b l i c



                                                               were not informed of the alert by any level of public
                                                               health—local, provincial, or national. The next day,
                                                               these physicians discovered the WHO alert through their
                                                               own intelligence gathering.
                                                                                                                             o f
                                                                                                                             R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                              25
                  .................................................................................................

                                                                                 Another patient who was in the emergency department
                  2C. SARS I: The Outbreak Begins                                with Mr. T on March 7, 2003 became ill on March 13,
                        (March 13, 2003 - March 25, 2003)                        and was brought back to The Scarborough Hospital by
                  Mr. T died on March 13, 2003. By this time, the tuberculosis   ambulance. He suffered a confirmed myocardial
                  tests results were available and negative, and several         infarction—a heart attack. His contact with Mr. T was
                  other family members were sick. Public health officials,       known, but the low level of his fever, and small infiltrate
                  in consultation with experts like Dr. Allison McGeer and       on his chest x-ray were thought at the time not to be
                  Dr. Andrew Simor, connected the dots. There was an             compatible with SARS. Health care workers used only
                  unusual respiratory illness in Guangdong that had              standard infection control precautions while treating the
                  apparently spread to Hong Kong. Mrs. K had recently            patient, and transferring him to York Central Hospital, a
                  travelled to Hong Kong. She had died at home. Soon             full-service community hospital north of Toronto. He
                  after, her son had developed a respiratory illness that did    would become the source of another SARS cluster that
                  not respond to the usual treatment. He too had died, and       ultimately affected more than 50 individuals, and closed
                  other family members were now developing symptoms.             down York Central Hospital.

                  The attending physicians recognized the need to prevent        While Toronto fought a spreading SARS outbreak, British
                  further transmission of a disease that was unequivocally       Columbia faced a different situation. The same day Mr. T
                  contagious, but whose mode of transmission was                 died, before anything was known in Vancouver about
                  unknown. They arranged transfers of Mrs. K’s family            the Toronto outbreak, a man who had also stayed at the
                  members to hospitals with negative pressure isolation          Metropole Hotel in Hong Kong arrived at the Vancouver
                  rooms, important in preventing transmission of airborne        General Hospital with a flu-like illness. He lived with his
                  disease. Sunnybrook and Women’s College Health                 wife, had not been in contact with family and friends,
                  Sciences Centre, Mount Sinai Hospital, and the Toronto         and went directly to the hospital when he became
                  Western site of the University Health Network all              symptomatic. Infection control practitioners and the
                  accepted family members. A granddaughter was                   attending physician at the Vancouver General Hospital
                  admitted to the Hospital for Sick Children.                    ensured that their index patient was masked, and quickly
                                                                                 isolated. There were no reports of secondary transmissions
                  Mr. P, who had been treated in the emergency department        from this case. In contrast, Mrs. K in Toronto was
                  bed adjacent to Mr. T on March 7, 2003 returned to The         surrounded by a large family and sought only ambulatory
                  Scarborough Hospital on March 16 with respiratory              care, and her ill son had no travel history to trigger
                  symptoms, and a fever. He was admitted into the airborne       suspicions upon his admission to hospital.
                  isolation room in the emergency department, and
                  managed in contact and droplet precautions before being        On March 13, 2003, Health Canada received notification
                  sent to the ICU. However, his wife, who was with him           of the Toronto cluster, and convened the first of what
                  in the emergency department, was not asked about               would become daily information-sharing teleconferences
                  illness until he was transferred to the ICU. Mr. P died on     among federal, provincial, and territorial public health
                  March 21; his wife and three other members of his family       experts. On March 14, the Ontario Ministry of Health
                  were infected. His wife infected seven visitors to the         and Long-Term Care [OMHLTC] held a press conference
                  emergency department, six hospital staff, two patients,        with Toronto Public Health and Mount Sinai Hospital
                  two paramedics, a firefighter, and a housekeeper.              spokespersons about the cluster of atypical pneumonia
                                                                                 cases. Media outlets began to cover the emerging
                  The physician who intubated Mr. P in the ICU wore a            story avidly.
                  mask, eye protection, gown, and gloves while performing
                                                                                 SARS continued to spread at The Scarborough Hospital,
S A R S




                  the procedure, but he developed SARS. Anxieties about
                  the infectivity of SARS were understandably magnified by       Grace Division; patients, staff, and visitors developed
                  this incident, especially when three nurses present at the     symptoms consistent with the new disease. Grace
                  intubation were also infected. Intubation procedures, a        closed its emergency and intensive care services on
                  significant source of droplet production, would be a           March 23, 2003, and began refusing new admissions
f r o m




                  recurring cause of SARS transmission during the outbreak.      and transfers from other hospitals. Outpatient clinics
                                                                                 were closed, and employees were barred from working at
                                                                                 other institutions. Anyone who had entered the hospital
                                                                                 after March 16 was asked to adhere to a ten-day home
L e a r n i n g




                                                                                 quarantine. The hospital implemented stringent
                                                                                 infection control policies including contact and droplet



                  26        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

precautions such as hand washing, wearing gowns,                                 might transmit the new disease. Provincial public health
gloves, N95 masks3, eye protection, and the use of single                        activated its emergency operations centre (better known
or negative pressure rooms for all SARS patients.                                as MAG for Ministry Action Group).

On March 23, 2003, officials recognized that the number                          By the evening of March 26, 2003, the West Park unit
of available negative pressure rooms in Toronto was                              and all available negative pressure rooms in Toronto
being exhausted. In a four-hour period on the afternoon                          hospitals were full; however, ten ill Scarborough Hospital
of March 23, staff at West Park Hospital, a chronic care                         staff needing admissions were waiting in the emergency
facility in the city, re-commissioned 25 beds in an                              department, and others who were ill were waiting at
unused building formerly used to house patients with                             home to be seen. Overnight, with the declaration of a
tuberculosis. Despite the efforts of West Park physicians                        provincial emergency, the OMHLTC required all hospitals
and nurses, and assistance from staff at the Scarborough                         to create units to care for SARS patients. Accepting a lead
Grace and Mount Sinai Hospitals, qualified staff could be                        role in the outbreak, Sunnybrook and Women’s would,
found to care for only 14 patients.                                              within 48 hours, put 40 negative pressure rooms into
                                                                                 operation.
Faced with increasing transmission, the Ontario government
designated SARS as a reportable, communicable, and                               By March 25, 2003, Health Canada was reporting 19
virulent disease under the Health Protection and Promotion                       cases of SARS in Canada—18 in Ontario and the single
Act on March 25, 2003. This move gave public health                              case in Vancouver. But 48 patients with a presumptive
officials the authority to track infected people, and issue                      diagnosis of SARS had in fact been admitted to hospital
orders preventing them from engaging in activities that                          by the end of that day. Many more individuals were


  F              I G U R E             1
  Number of Probable Cases of SARS in Canada, February 23 to July 2, 2003
  (N=250), excludes 1 patient for whom onset date is unknown.
               10




                     8




                                                                                                                                                             C a n a d a
   Number of Cases




                     6




                                                                                                                                                             i n
                     4




                     2                                                                                                                                       H e a l t h
                                                                                                                                                             P u b l i c



                     0

                         23-   2-   9-  16- 23- 30-     6-    13-     20- 27-    4-  11- 18- 25-     1-                     8-  15- 22-           29-
                         Feb- Mar- Mar- Mar- Mar- Mar- Apr-   Apr-    Apr- Apr- May- May- May- May- Jun-                   Jun- Jun- Jun-        Jun-
                          03   03   03   03   03   03   03     03      03   03   03   03   03   03   03                     03   03   03          03

                                                                     Onset Date
                                                                                                                                                             o f
                                                                                                                                                             R e n e w a l




3 Respirators are designed to help prevent the inhalation of airborne particles by the user; the N95 mask is technically a respirator, and is designed to
  filter 95% of particles larger than one micron. Surgical masks trap droplets produced by the user, and help prevent the transmission of virus-
  containing secretions. During the SARS outbreak, many patients and visitors were asked to wear surgical masks.



..........................................................................................                                                              27
                  .................................................................................................

                  starting to feel symptoms, and would subsequently be
                  identified as SARS patients. Epidemic curves later              D   I S C U S S I O N               P O I N T
                  showed that this period was the peak of the outbreak.
                                                                                  Ministerial leadership is needed to create system-wide
                  On March 19, nine Canadians developed “probable”
                                                                                  outbreak management protocols, ideally of a graded
                  SARS, the highest single-day total. Taking “suspect” and
                                                                                  nature commensurate with the severity of an outbreak.
                  “probable” cases together, the peak was March 26, and
                                                                                  Many Ontarians experienced adverse effects from
                  the three days, March 25 to 27 are the highest three-day
                                                                                  cancelled surgeries and delayed appointments. Ontario
                  period in the outbreak.
                                                                                  could put hospitals on “Code Orange” status (or not),
                                                                                  but did not have a coordinated outbreak protocol for
                  2D.The Emergency                                                health and long-term care facilities and community-
                        (March 26, 2003 - April 7, 2003)                          based health care providers. Do other Canadian
                                                                                  provinces have such protocols in place? Are they
                  Ontario Premier Ernie Eves declared SARS a provincial           harmonized with each other to permit interprovincial
                  emergency on March 26, 2003. Under the Emergency                coordination in the event of a national outbreak? Has
                  Management Act, the Premier has the power to direct and         Health Canada taken a leadership role in creating
                  control local governments and facilities to ensure that         template protocols and facilitating their adoption?
                  necessary services are provided. The same day, the
                  province activated its multi-ministry Provincial               Dr. Jim Young, Ontario’s Commissioner of Public Safety
                  Operations Centre for emergency response, situated on          and Security, co-chaired the Provincial Operations Centre
                  the 19th floor at 25 Grosvenor Street.                         Executive Committee, and led the Executive and Scientific
                                                                                 Advisory Committee in a lengthy and intense exercise to
                  All hospitals in the Greater Toronto Area [GTA] and Simcoe     assess the pros and cons of designating one or more
                  County were ordered to activate their “Code Orange”            facilities as “SARS hospitals.” Decision makers feared an
                  emergency plans by the OMHLTC. “Code Orange” meant             outbreak would over-run any one or two designated SARS
                  that the involved hospitals suspended non-essential            hospitals. The West Park experience suggested that the
                  services. They were also required to limit visitors, create    logistics of staffing a SARS specialty hospital would be
                  isolation units for potential SARS patients, and implement     extremely difficult. Concentrating SARS patients in a few
                  protective clothing for exposed staff (i.e., gowns, masks,     institutions would put an enormous burden on these
                  and goggles). Four days later, provincial officials            hospitals, and place their clinical personnel at great risk.
                  extended access restrictions to all Ontario hospitals.         Patients would still go to the emergency department
                                                                                 nearest them, and language in current collective agreements
                  Later, the Committee heard mixed opinions about whether        constrained the ability of the system to move staff into
                  Code Orange was justified. Several interviewees noted          new institutions. The team decided to build capacity for
                  the massive number of cancelled services, and suggested        the management of SARS in multiple institutions. SARS
                  that the collateral casualties from the suspension of health   patients were cared for at over 20 hospital sites scattered
                  care activities may never be fully measured. Other harms       across the Greater Toronto Area.
                  were more subtle, including hardship caused by restrictions
                  on visits between families and patients hospitalized with
                  conditions other than SARS. These informants claimed
                                                                                 2D.1 Information Technology and Data
                  the activation of Code Orange demonstrated a “lack of               Sharing
                  understanding of the system.” They suggested that The          On April 1, 2003, Dr. Ian Johnson, a professor and
                  Scarborough Hospital could have been closed and                epidemiologist at the University of Toronto, was seconded
                  converted into a dedicated SARS hospital, with staff           to the OMHLTC to establish a SARS surveillance system.
S A R S




                  support from other facilities, while selected other            He had formerly served as associate medical officer of
                  hospitals began urgent preparations to become SARS-care        health for North York. Upon his arrival, Dr. Johnson
                  centres. The remainder of the system could then operate        immediately noted insufficient physical and human
                  with increased infection control precautions.                  resources. Dr. Johnson later told the Committee that
f r o m




                                                                                 reporting structures were unclear, and the head office of
                  Other interviewees argued strenuously that the declaration     the Public Health Branch was simply unable to provide
                  of emergency and Code Orange were essential to                 optimal support for outbreak investigation and
                  galvanize infection control, and prevent unrecognized          management. There were also frequent requests for data
L e a r n i n g




                  exposure by hospitals in the face of great uncertainty         for the provincial government’s daily press conferences.
                  about the transmissibility of SARS.



                  28        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

Dr. Johnson characterized the province’s infectious             Dr. Colin D’Cunha is Ontario’s Chief Medical Officer and
disease tracking and outbreak management software as            Commissioner of Public Health. He co-chaired the
“an archaic DOS platform used in the late eighties that         provincial emergency team with Dr. Young. Dr. D’Cunha
could not be adapted for SARS.” Several other key               advised the Committee that Toronto Public Health was
informants echoed this sentiment. In 2000, the Ontario          initially overwhelmed, and not able to generate timely
Public Health Branch had led a process that developed a         data in the first two or three weeks of the outbreak.
five-year plan to upgrade information technology, but it        Another informant noted that Toronto has 1,800 public
was not approved for funding.                                   health employees, and wondered if the city had
                                                                maintained a large enough outbreak management and
This outdated software platform was assessed, and rapidly       infectious disease unit.
rejected by Toronto Public Health as unsuitable for the SARS
outbreak. Toronto Public Health developed new software          Dr. D’Cunha stated that protection of patient
tools to deal with tracking cases and contacts; other local     confidentiality constrained his ability to release data to
health units eventually followed suit as the outbreak spread.   Health Canada. Senior GTA public health physicians
However, individual files for cases and contacts were main-     took the same view of their obligations to share data
tained on paper charts that included colour-coded Post-It       with the Ontario Public Health Branch. Health Canada
notes. Dr. Sheela Basrur, the city’s chief medical officer of   informants in turn argued that they never wanted
health, later commented that Toronto was using nineteenth       personal identifiers, simply more detail to meet WHO
century tools to fight a twenty-first century disease.          reporting requirements. Multiple informants noted that
                                                                relationships among the public health officials at the
Several interviewees reported that data handling protocols      three levels of government were dysfunctional.
were variously unclear or non-existent. Developing them
during the SARS outbreak proved to be time-consuming            A memorandum of understanding on data sharing was
and frustrating. One interviewee described the situation        never finalized between the province and the federal
as “a turf war” on multiple levels. Offers of assistance        government. High-level public health officials in Ontario
from academic clinicians were rejected; infectious disease      and Health Canada have since given the Committee
specialists and hospital epidemiologists set up a separate
                                                                sharply divergent views on how well information flowed
data system for clinical management and institutional
                                                                with respect to both its timeliness and adequacy. It is
infection control.
                                                                clear that at points during the outbreak, Dr. Arlene King
                                                                of Health Canada dealt directly with Dr. Johnson and
Health Canada officials were concerned that the Public
                                                                local public health officials to acquire the more detailed
Health Branch of the OMHLTC was, in the words of one
                                                                data necessary for discussions with WHO. Local public




                                                                                                                               C a n a d a
informant, “completely overwhelmed”. The Committee
                                                                health units in turn faced pressure from the Ontario
later learned that the personnel and infrastructure
                                                                Public Health Branch to send on data for press
supporting Chief Medical Officers of Health are thin in
                                                                conferences, for reports to Health Canada, or both.
several provinces.


  D                                                               D   I S C U S S I O N               P O I N T




                                                                                                                               i n
      I S C U S S I O N               P O I N T
                                                                  The lack of a modern database accessible to local,
  Provincial public health authorities are the next line of


                                                                                                                               H e a l t h
                                                                  provincial, and federal health authorities had adverse
  defence when an outbreak spreads beyond a single
                                                                  impacts on the flow of information to the public and
  municipal health unit or overwhelms its capacity.
                                                                  international agencies. The absence of appropriate and
  Ideally, they provide leadership and coordination for
                                                                  shared databases and capacity for interim analyses of
  public health activities province-wide. British Columbia
                                                                  data, also interfered with outbreak investigation and
  has taken the additional step of building a public health
                                                                  management, and constrained epidemiologic and clinical
                                                                                                                               P u b l i c


  focus for infectious diseases in the British Columbia
                                                                  research into SARS. Agreements for data sharing
  Centre for Disease Control. Would Ontario have benefited
                                                                  between different levels of government, and the necessary
  from a similar agency at the provincial level? How do
                                                                  information technology, were apparently not in place
  we build a second line of defence against outbreaks on a
                                                                  before the outbreak. Who is responsible for developing
  national basis? Ontario has also devolved public health
                                                                  such protocols? What kind of information systems
                                                                                                                               o f




  functions to municipal control; expenses are divided
                                                                  could help prevent future problems? How can officials
  equally between the provincial government and munici-
                                                                  ensure the confidentiality and security of patient data
                                                                                                                               R e n e w a l




  palities. Did this weaken Ontario’s capacity to manage
                                                                  while facilitating the necessary access and analyses?
  multi-jurisdictional outbreaks in a coordinated fashion?



..........................................................................................                                29
                  .................................................................................................

                  A senior public health physician, on secondment to              confusing for the hospitals.” Several clinical and admin-
                  WHO during the SARS outbreak, assessed the                      istrative leaders raised concerns that early directives were
                  jurisdictional tensions bluntly after a visit to Canada in      not field-tested, lacked a scientific basis or were opera-
                  May: “The system is sick. It’s broken.”                         tionally impossible. Dr. Jim Young noted, however, that
                                                                                  the situation required “decisive action, not perfection.
                  2D.2 Scientific Advisory Committee                              Every hour that we wasted was more people getting
                                                                                  infected.”
                  Another group that complained about insufficent data
                  was the Scientific Advisory Committee [SAC], an ad hoc          A controversial directive was the requirement that health
                  group of experts that started as a “human-cellphone             care workers wear fit-tested N95 masks. Neither the fit-
                  conglomerate” of concerned physicians, infection control        testing (a complex operation requiring a subject to try
                  practitioners, and administrators from across the country.      various mask designs while a bitter-tasting gas circulates
                  Made up of volunteers who essentially dropped whatever          underneath a hood), nor the appropriateness of the N95
                  they were doing to assist in the Toronto outbreak, the          standard itself had been fully discussed by the SAC.
                  committee members worked long hours, seven days a               Given that SARS was being spread primarily via droplets,
                  week. Several Toronto physicians were integral members,         some informants questioned whether N95 masks were
                  but when Dr. Allison McGeer fell ill, and five core members     necessary. Others stressed that the disease should be
                  were forced into quarantine, Dr. Dick Zoutman, a hospital       treated as airborne until more information was available.
                  epidemiologist and medical microbiologist from Kingston,
                  moved to Toronto and assumed the chair. “Handcuffed”            Notwithstanding the debate about the necessity of N95
                  by inadequate amounts of information, Dr. Zoutman               masks, fit-testing was felt by almost all to be
                  later commented that his group “wanted desperately to           operationally impossible. The Provincial Operations
                  get into the epidemiology, but had no data, capacity, or        Centre issued the edict that health care workers should
                  time to do so.”                                                 wear fit-tested masks, but no support was provided to
                                                                                  hospitals to ensure this would happen. Confusing
                  The SAC was charged with developing quarantine                  matters further, unions such as the Ontario Public Service
                  guidelines and hospital directives covering topics such as      Employees Union attempted to fulfil their safety
                  restricted access, isolation precautions, employee screening,   mandates by issuing their own health alerts and
                  and patient transfers. The directives were passed to the        recommendations. The Ontario Nursing Association was
                  director of the Hospitals Branch of the OMHLTC and              alarmed by the lack of fit-testing and non-compliance
                  her staff, who reworded them to facilitate implemen-            with the provincial directive, and launched grievances to
                  tation by administrators, or, as the team called it,            protect front-line nurses.
                  “translation into ‘Hospitalese’.”

                  Preparing directives under intense pressure, the SAC             D    I S C U S S I O N                P O I N T
                  occasionally lost track of draft versions in the early going,
                                                                                   The Scientific Advisory Committee [SAC] was a hastily-
                  but soon devised the necessary protocols. The SAC also
                                                                                   assembled group of tireless volunteers. With over 200
                  had to manage a frequently changing membership as
                                                                                   SARS patients in Toronto, infectious disease experts
                  some physicians returned to their “day jobs”. Along with
                                                                                   were spread thin—and the city had only a handful of
                  offering high praise for the SAC’s chair and members,
                                                                                   hospital epidemiologists. Their ability to participate in
                  interviewees later wondered why the committee did not
                                                                                   SAC deliberations was limited, and when they were able
                  include representatives with expertise in anaesthesia,
                                                                                   to participate in person, the entire committee was at risk
                  paediatrics, or respiratory therapy. Representation from
                                                                                   of being infected with the SARS virus. Should a body
                  family medicine came later in the outbreak, when it was
S A R S




                                                                                   similar to the SAC already have been in place? The CDC
                  recognized that primary care input was essential to
                                                                                   has recently initiated the use of a “B [or Brains] team” to
                  generate directives for physicians practising in
                                                                                   provide scientific backup and sober second thoughts in
                  community settings.
                                                                                   the midst of what is often a crisis atmosphere. What
f r o m




                                                                                   kind of structure should be in place in the provinces or
                  Nuances were sometimes lost and meanings blurred
                                                                                   nationally to ensure the requisite scientific support for
                  as directives were processed through various channels.
                                                                                   outbreak investigation and ‘B team’ functions? Who
                  A specialist who participated on the SAC later stated:
                                                                                   should issue directives to health care workers and
                  “At times, the directives issued to the hospitals appeared
L e a r n i n g




                                                                                   institutions, and what kind of support should be
                  to be significantly different than directives that were
                                                                                   provided to facilitate compliance?
                  agreed to by the [SAC] members and proved to be very



                  30        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


2D.3 Leadership                                                   2D.4 Health Canada’s Role
Various interviewees acknowledged the indefatigable               According to Health Canada’s internal communications,
leaders of the emergency response, but remarked that,             on March 14, 2003, the federal government sent “six
as one put it, “we never knew who was in charge.”                 infectious disease and epidemiology experts to help with
Dr. D’Cunha and Dr. Young jointly led the Provincial              the investigation of SARS cases,” with “an additional
Operations Centre. Many interviewees noted tensions               eight experts” sent on April 1. In contrast, a provincial
between the two physicians, as well as their differing            official later commented that Health Canada sent three
management styles. In separate interviews, both                   trainees from its Field Epidemiology Program to do a
Drs. Young and D’Cunha acknowledged that the dual                 research project with Toronto Public Health. It appears
leadership structure was less than ideal, and one person          that about a dozen Health Canada personnel of varying
should have been in charge. Matters were further                  levels of seniority were actually on the ground in Toronto
complicated as other branches of the OMHLTC helped to             for much of the outbreak, but largely invisible. Senior
manage the interactions with hospitals, long-term care            federal personnel were closely involved in investigating
facilities, physicians, and various elements of the health        a number of SARS clusters, kept other provinces and
service system. A number of physicians involved in caring         territories prepared for SARS, and managed the international
for SARS patients began actively discussing whether and           liaison. However, federal involvement in Ontario was
how the management of the outbreak could be handed                limited by the lack of a delineated role in an organizational
over to a single “SARS czar”.                                     structure, lack of data for outbreak investigation, and
                                                                  absence of business process agreements for inter-
At the federal level, similar themes emerged. Staff at the        jurisdictional collaboration.
Health Canada Regional Office in Toronto felt they could
have played a greater role given their proximity to the crisis,   For example, a group of field epidemiologists from Health
and their ability to gather intelligence locally. A pre-          Canada first worked with Toronto Public Health, and then
existing F/P/T Pandemic Influenza planning committee              were moved to a OMHLTC office at 5700 Yonge Street
became the nidus for daily SARS teleconferences organized         where their duties included data entry. Their mentors in
by Health Canada, but representatives from Ontario were           Ottawa objected to this deployment of skilled personnel,
too busy dealing with the outbreak to join in. Several            and the field epidemiologists were demoralized. Others
senior Health Canada personnel from Ottawa who came               were sent in to help on a rotation system, but this was
to help in Toronto were identified for praise by inter-           suboptimal. A member of the SAC commented that “the
viewees. However, fairly or not, most informants contrasted       on-the-ground help from Health Canada seemed to come
the response of Health Canada’s Population and Public             on five-day contracts so there was no continuity.” For




                                                                                                                                  C a n a d a
Health Branch with the high standard of federal support           their part, the field epidemiologists were critical of the
set by the CDC in the United States. One provincial               lack of provincial organization, and nonavailability of
health official later commented that “Tunney’s Pasture is         data. On April 30, Health Canada pulled back the field
good for general advice, and Ottawa has a big chequebook,         epidemiologists from the provincial office, a move that
but the feds lack operational credibility.”                       some informants deemed unsupportive and ill-advised.




                                                                                                                                  i n
                                                                  The federal government convened an invitational “SARS
  D   I S C U S S I O N                 P O I N T                 Summit” in Toronto on April 30 and May 1, 2003, setting


                                                                                                                                  H e a l t h
  Emergency situations are inherently stressful. Public           out the framework for a national SARS strategy. The
  health crises require clear leadership at the municipal,        event helped to promote a commonality of purpose in
  provincial, and ultimately national levels as their scope       the struggle against SARS, although some front-line clinical
  widens. Who should provide these differing levels of            and public health physicians who had been fighting
  leadership? What kind of an organizational structure            SARS at ground level later wondered why they were not
                                                                                                                                  P u b l i c



  would work best? Some informants questioned the                 invited. Health Canada also facilitated the purchase of
  embedding of the response to SARS, a public health              approximately 1.5 million N95 masks for the National
  crisis, in Ontario’s general emergency management               Emergency Stockpile System [NESS], and sent 10,000 to
  structures. Should there be a category of health                Toronto health officials.
  emergencies distinct from the general emergency
                                                                                                                                  o f




  machinery at the provincial and federal levels?
                                                                                                                                  R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                                 31
                  .................................................................................................


                    D   I S C U S S I O N                 P O I N T                D   I S C U S S I O N                 P   O I N T
                    In the United States, as in Canada, responsibility for         Communications was among the issues raised in a
                    outbreak management progresses through local and               compelling letter to the Committee, signed by the
                    state public health chains of command. However, the            presidents or chief executives of nine major health care
                    Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC] is            groups—the Canadian Medical Association, the
                    generally ‘invited early and often’ to become involved         Canadian Public Health Association, the Canadian
                    with any serious outbreak. Its credibility mitigates           Nurses Association, the Canadian Healthcare
                    jurisdictional tensions. The same cannot be said at            Association, the Canadian Dental Association, the
                    present for the Population and Public Health Branch of         Association of Canadian Academic Healthcare
                    Health Canada. How can we build federal capacity to            Organizations, the Canadian Pharmacists Association,
                    support provincial and municipal officials in battling         the Canadian Association of Emergency Physicians, and
                    disease outbreaks? What collaborative hierarchy of             the Canadian Council on Health Services Accreditation.
                    roles and responsibilities can be devised that reflects the    They wrote:
                    unique nature of Canada’s federation?
                                                                                   “During a crisis or emergency, the public will quickly
                                                                                   begin to look for a trusted and consistent source of
                  2D.5 Public Communications and                                   information. However, during the early days of the
                       Media Relations                                             SARS crisis, in Toronto, there were occasions when
                                                                                   several different public health officials were being
                  Health Canada, the OMHLTC, and Toronto Public Health             quoted and had titles attributed to them that appeared to
                  all issued regular SARS updates on their websites.               indicate they were responding in an acting capacity only
                  Televised SARS press conferences were a daily feature of         and not as an “official”. This had the potential to leave
                  national newscasts—Drs. James Young, Colin D’Cunha,              an impression with the public that no one with any
                  and Sheela Basrur became household names. Dr. Donald             authority was in control. Establishing one individual
                  Low, chief microbiologist at Mount Sinai Hospital and            with authoritative credentials as the chief spokesperson
                  professor of medicine at the University of Toronto,              creates public confidence, and lends credibility to the
                  emerged as one of the unofficial leaders of the SARS battle,     messages. How the crisis or emergency is reported is
                  and sometimes joined the official press conferences. He          just as important as how it is actually handled. It is also
                  and other infectious disease leaders also did numerous           crucial that the public, and the media have a clear
                  unscripted interviews.                                           understanding of the language of the crisis so that clear,
                                                                                   consistent messages are communicated and received.
                  Many observers felt that interaction with the media              Governments across jurisdictions must develop an
                  became an end in itself during the outbreak. Several             emergency plan to which all parties are committed
                  Committee informants felt the impression created was             regarding leadership in communications.”
                  one of too many “talking heads” whose opinions
                  sometimes diverged. Singapore, in contrast, held an
                                                                                  The first scientific papers describing SARS were published
                  evening press conference with a single spokesperson, the
                                                                                  on the New England Journal of Medicine website on March
                  Minister of Health, leaving public health officials and
                                                                                  31, 2003; one came from Hong Kong and the other from
                  infectious disease experts to focus on the outbreak. A
                                                                                  Canada. In the following weeks, researchers from Hong
                  senior physician later questioned why the media profiled
                                                                                  Kong flooded the medical journals with important
                  the cumulative counts of probable and suspect SARS
                                                                                  analyses—eight major publications appeared in The Lancet
                  patients, rather than the relatively unimpressive daily
                                                                                  alone. Several more were spread between the British
                  incidence statistics (as per figure 1). There appeared,
S A R S




                                                                                  Medical Journal, Science and the New England Journal of
                  however, to be no coherent communications strategy
                                                                                  Medicine.
                  aimed at dispelling the sense of deepening crisis.
                                                                                  In the same period, Canadian researchers published two
                  2D.6 Research
f r o m




                                                                                  more articles in the major international journals. One
                  On March 15, 2003, WHO established an international             was an important breakthrough, albeit quickly repeated
                  network of laboratories to find the agent responsible           in other jurisdictions—researchers from British Columbia
                  for SARS. The speed of the investigation was unpre-             and Winnipeg described the genetic sequence of the
L e a r n i n g




                  cedented—barely a month later, WHO announced that a             Toronto SARS virus in Science. Later, a team of doctors
                  previously unknown member of the coronavirus family             from Toronto depicted the clinical features of SARS in
                  had been conclusively identified as the most likely culprit.    JAMA - the Journal of the American Medical Association.


                  32        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

While researchers in Hong Kong were busy correlating              2D.7 Laboratories
clinical and laboratory features of SARS with epidemiologic
data, this did not occur in Toronto. The first clinical           Within 24 hours of receiving the initial specimens from
paper from Toronto was compiled with minimal input                SARS patients in early March 2003, the National Microbiology
from public health officials; its lead author was a resident      Laboratory in Winnipeg ruled out all known respiratory
physician just two years out of medical school.                   pathogens. The laboratory was a key member of the
                                                                  WHO network responding to SARS, and helped develop
Some of Toronto’s infectious disease experts were too             and refine diagnostic tests for SARS. Over the course of
busy taking care of patients to find time for research.           the first and second outbreaks, the laboratory tested
Others were occupied by SAC deliberations. Multiple               several thousand specimens that included blood, sputum,
informants praised the work done by infectious disease            stool, urine, and nasopharyngeal aspirates. At one point,
and infection control specialists who supported a wide            the laboratory was receiving 600 specimens per day, but
range of activities inside and outside their home                 had sufficient surge capacity to accommodate the load.
institutions. They and countless health care workers rose
daily to the challenge of battling SARS, placing themselves       Patient samples often arrived with no epidemiologic or
at risk to battle a new and contagious disease with a             clinical data—sometimes, even basic identifying data
significant mortality rate. As one academic physician             were incorrect or missing. More disconcerting was the
later ruefully commented, “It doesn’t show up on my               finding that over 170 individuals who did not have
CV if I’m in the trenches battling SARS.” However, even           SARS—at least according to restrictive case definitions—
had an appropriate database been in place, the required           tested positive for the virus. Although some results may
machinery and supporting personnel may well have been             have been false positives (i.e., due to imperfect tests or
insufficient to allow either appropriate outbreak investi-        specimen contamination), scientists were concerned that
gation or the associated epidemiologic and clinical research.     members of this group represented an opportunity for
                                                                  the virus to spread unchecked into the general community.
On July 26, 2003, a major paper with multinational                The absence of a central database made finding these
authorship was published in The Lancet, providing data in         individuals and their contacts more difficult than it
support of the proposition that the new SARS-associated           should have been—a situation that one informant called
coronavirus had met the criteria to be designated the             “very frustrating and dangerous.”
causative agent of the new disease. Patient data were
included from six countries: Hong Kong, Singapore,                In contrast, the Central Provincial Public Health Laboratory
Vietnam, Germany, France, and the United Kingdom.                 in Toronto was unable to provide optimal support during
No Canadians appeared among the 22 authors, and no                the SARS outbreak. Senior physicians advised the




                                                                                                                                 C a n a d a
Canadian patients were included in the study sample.              Committee that microbiology laboratory capacity nationally
                                                                  has eroded in recent years; and in Ontario, the Central
                                                                  Laboratory was unable to keep up with the testing volumes
  D   I S C U S S I O N                  P O I N T                involved in previous outbreaks of West Nile and Norwalk
                                                                  virus. A number of infectious disease specialists suggested
  Outbreak investigation and research shade together. For
                                                                  that there remains an urgent need for rapid and




                                                                                                                                 i n
  example, provisional analyses of data during an outbreak
                                                                  coordinated laboratory testing for SARS and related viral
  allow researchers to estimate incubation periods (the
                                                                  diseases, especially with the fall flu season approaching.


                                                                                                                                 H e a l t h
  length of time necessary to quarantine a contact), and
  devise treatment protocols. Canadian researchers were
                                                                  With the provincial lab overwhelmed, some hospitals
  hamstrung by patient care and scientific advisory
                                                                  sent specimens directly to the National Microbiology
  responsibilities, a lack of data, infighting about data
                                                                  Laboratory, bypassing the usual hierarchy of referral.
  access, limited research funds, and the need to obtain
                                                                  The Hospital for Sick Children, Mount Sinai, and
  ethics approvals at multiple institutions. Submissions to
                                                                                                                                 P u b l i c



                                                                  Sunnybrook and Women’s had strong platforms in
  the Committee by the Canadian Association of Medical
                                                                  polymerase chain reaction technology—an elegant
  Microbiologists, among others, have recommended
                                                                  laboratory testing modality that identifies micro-
  establishing a common ethics review board for outbreak
                                                                  organisms by analyzing strands of their DNA or RNA.
  situations, developing guidelines to ensure that outbreak
                                                                  They became the de facto and unfunded referral centres
  data are made available to all interested researchers (owner-
                                                                                                                                 o f




                                                                  for Toronto SARS testing.
  ship and authorship issues should not be of primary
  importance during an emergency), and assembling a dedi-
                                                                                                                                 R e n e w a l




  cated and experienced research team early in an outbreak.



..........................................................................................                                 33
                  .................................................................................................

                                                                                 for patients with worsening respiratory symptoms, a
                    D   I S C U S S I O N                P O I N T               clinical scenario that apparently corresponded to an
                                                                                 excessive and counterproductive inflammatory response
                    The Canadian Public Health Association advised the
                                                                                 in the lungs.
                    Committee that “current inabilities or unwillingness to
                    share information within the laboratory network are
                                                                                 As the doctors in Toronto gained experience, they
                    aggravated by the fact that three sectors—the public,
                                                                                 concluded that ribavirin was likely causing more harm
                    private, and voluntary sectors at three levels—the
                                                                                 than good. Many patients receiving it were developing
                    municipal, provincial, and federal levels—provide labora-
                                                                                 toxic side effects like red blood cell breakdown and liver
                    tory services.” Standardized testing and coordinated
                                                                                 dysfunction, and many patients who did not receive the
                    collection/sharing of data would help inform outbreak
                                                                                 antiviral medication were recovering. This information,
                    management. How should the hierarchy of referral and
                                                                                 coupled with in vitro testing (i.e., in the laboratory)
                    responsibility be organized for laboratory testing during
                                                                                 showing little or no effect on the SARS coronavirus, led
                    outbreaks? Who should set and police standards? How
                                                                                 Canadian physicians to stop prescribing ribavirin.
                    can we strengthen relationships between laboratories
                                                                                 Clinicians in other countries continued to use ribavirin,
                    and clinical services, public health and government
                                                                                 but in smaller doses that limited its side effects. Even in
                    regulators? How do we address the supply, recruitment
                                                                                 this era of evidence-based medicine, SARS forced
                    and retention of medical microbiologists and virologists
                                                                                 physicians to trust their instincts—and their colleagues’
                    in public health laboratories?
                                                                                 collective wisdom.

                  2D.8 Clinical Challenges                                       By the end of the first week of April 2003, 91 probable
                                                                                 and 135 suspect SARS cases had been reported in Canada.
                  SARS was and remains a challenging disease to diagnose         Ten people had died.
                  and treat—it presents with nonspecific symptoms, it has
                  no hallmark abnormality on physical exam or biochemical
                  testing, and there is still no unequivocally effective         2E. The Quest for Containment
                  treatment. Toronto-area hospitals and clinicians had never           (April 8, 2003 – April 23, 2003)
                  faced an outbreak like SARS. Clinics designed specifically
                  to assess potential SARS cases were created at several sites   2E.1 Public Health’s Fight
                  in the GTA to relieve the burden on emergency departments,
                                                                                 Public health officials in York and Toronto continued to
                  and to help prevent further transmission. Once identified,
                                                                                 trace and quarantine contacts with good results. The
                  SARS patients were cared for at numerous hospitals across
                                                                                 outbreak management teams and leaders of the local
                  the city during the first wave of the outbreak.
                                                                                 public health units were identified by some interviewees
                                                                                 as those who deserve greatest credit for containing the
                  Other countries used different strategies—in Singapore,
                                                                                 SARS outbreak.
                  for example, authorities concentrated all SARS patients in
                  one hospital. Hong Kong tried to centralize SARS care in
                                                                                 Nonetheless, concerns mounted that SARS was poised to
                  a single institution but its capacity was rapidly exceeded.
                                                                                 spread into the community. Individuals who attended a
                  In Beijing, officials ordered each hospital to establish a
                                                                                 funeral on April 3, 2003 were quarantined when some
                  “fever clinic” that could assess patients at risk of having
                                                                                 family members developed symptoms. An employee of a
                  SARS; then, in just eight days, construction workers built
                                                                                 large information technology company defied quarantine,
                  a thousand-bed SARS hospital on the city’s outskirts.
                                                                                 and returned to work while symptomatic; one co-worker
                                                                                 contracted SARS, and nearly two hundred more were sent
                  In Toronto, infectious disease specialists, clinical chiefs,
S A R S




                                                                                 into isolation. A Scarborough school was closed by
                  and intensive care specialists held daily teleconferences
                                                                                 Toronto Public Health when one student, a nurse’s child,
                  to discuss treatment options, and review the number of
                                                                                 exhibited SARS symptoms; four other schools would be
                  cases at each hospital. As with any new disease, treatment
                                                                                 closed by local school boards as a result of SARS concerns
                  plans for SARS were designed and implemented with
                                                                                 before the outbreak ended. Routine screening picked up
f r o m




                  little or no evidence to back them up. Typically, a patient
                                                                                 a fever in a nurse caring for SARS patients—a hurried search
                  admitted with SARS would receive supplemental oxygen
                                                                                 to identify her fellow commuter train passengers ensued.
                  as required, antibiotics to cover a potential bacterial
                  infection, and possibly—depending on the treating
L e a r n i n g




                  physician—ribavirin, a potent medication known to be
                  effective against a variety of viruses. Steroids were used



                  34        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

Because Toronto was the only city outside Asia to be hit        surveillance and quarantine to control the spread of
hard by SARS, the international media converged on the          infection, and unchecked community transmission
city like never before. The attention was not only unprece-     never materialized.
dented; it was unwanted. Despite the media attention,
there was no evidence that the SARS epidemic was                As residents of their jurisdictions became exposed through
spreading through the community. The Amoy Gardens               the religious group cluster, public health units in the
outbreak in Hong Kong, where the virus may have been            surrounding regions of Durham and Peel joined Toronto
transmitted through a defective sewer system, was an            and York in trying to stop the outbreak. The various
exception that proved the rule—the SARS virus was spread        units collaborated, but there was no overarching coordin-
by either brief exposure to big doses of viral particles or     ation across jurisdictions. Hospitals later complained that
close, prolonged contact. All but a few Canadian cases          they were sometimes contacted separately for information
occurred in travellers, health care workers, and their          about the same patient by two public health units.
immediate contacts. Using traditional surveillance, contact     Hospitals were also fielding requests for information from
tracing, and quarantine, opportunities for community            the OMHLTC Hospital Branch, the Public Health Branch,
transmission were being identified and contained.               and the Provincial Operations Centre. Understandably, it
                                                                appeared to those on the clinical front lines that public
The number of people quarantined grew daily. Very               health officials were not communicating with each other.
occasionally, someone would refuse to enter isolation,          Meanwhile, in Toronto, local public health workers were
and public health officials had to resort to legal means        nearing exhaustion—all non-SARS activity in infectious
to enforce compliance. But this was the exception;              diseases and many other provincially-mandated programs
Torontonians were generally remarkably compliant with           had been suspended, and virtually all qualified
highly demanding strictures. Quarantined individuals            employees were working on SARS full time.
lost income, suffered from boredom and loneliness, and
most importantly, were fearful that they might develop          The monumental efforts of public health workers played
SARS or that they may have spread SARS to family                a critical role in the containment of SARS. Toronto Public
and friends.                                                    Health, for example, investigated 1,907 separate reports
                                                                in addition to 220 cases of probable or suspect SARS,
Committee informants commented that different public            each of which involved several hours of investigative
health units seemed to have different thresholds for the        work, independent of contact tracing. A pair of papers
use of quarantine. A related issue is whether public health     later published in Science provided estimates of the
officials used quarantine too frequently. Some interviewees     “infectiousness” of the SARS virus. Both papers lead one
believed they did—one noted that while Beijing had              toward the same conclusion: although SARS is only




                                                                                                                                C a n a d a
2,500 cases of SARS compared to Toronto with 250, both          moderately transmissible, left unchecked it could have
cities quarantined about 30,000 individuals. Beijing            infected millions of people worldwide. Whether it would
quarantined fewer people per SARS case because they             have done so before mutating into a more benign form
focused on close contacts (e.g., household members,             is, fortunately, still unknown.
hospital visitors, and those who might have come in
                                                                2E.2 Primary Care


                                                                                                                                i n
contact with bodily fluids). On the other hand, the higher
caseload of probable and suspect SARS in Beijing might
actually have been a result of too-limited use of quarantine.   Although most of the attention during the outbreak was


                                                                                                                                H e a l t h
                                                                directed toward hospitals, several instances of patients
Perhaps the greatest scare of the Toronto outbreak              transmitting SARS to their family doctors produced
occurred on April 12, 2003 when a cluster of SARS cases         apprehension. One academic family physician voiced
was identified in a close-knit religious community.             concern as early as March 28, 2003: “Family physicians,
Remarkably, it had begun with exposure back in mid-             just like hospitals, need precise and explicit directions for
                                                                                                                                P u b l i c



March of several members of a large extended family at          screening patients, and for contending with suspect or
the initial epicentre—The Scarborough Hospital, Grace           probable SARS patients who might make it past the
Division. Over the ensuing weeks, the infection spread          screening system.” They also “required full protective
quietly through the extended family and some close              gear in the unlikely event that a SARS patient did make it
friends, health care workers who cared for them, and            into their offices.” He suggested that family physicians
                                                                                                                                o f




then into a religious group. In all, 31 cases, including        could be used as sentinels—reporting cases of pneumonia
three health care workers, were associated with this            to a central authority might pick up SARS clusters where
                                                                                                                                R e n e w a l




cluster. Public health workers employed active                  there was no obvious epidemiologic link.




..........................................................................................                                35
                  .................................................................................................

                  Guidelines for family doctors were eventually issued on       assist his breathing. None worked, and doctors decided
                  April 3, 2003 via the fax and e-mail network of the           he required intubation. The entire ordeal (from transfer
                  Ontario Medical Association. These instructions outlined      to intubation) took several hours. Many health care
                  three goals: first, to keep potential SARS patients out of    workers were exposed to the patient’s coughed-up
                  doctors’ offices using signs, pre-recorded telephone          secretions or the aerosols generated by devices to assist
                  messages and screening questionnaires; second, to safely      his breathing. Both were rich with SARS viral particles.
                  treat any SARS patients that did enter the office; and
                  third, to protect physicians and staff from infection.        By the following week, 11 health care workers present
                  Some informants later suggested that the guidelines were      during either the transfer or the intubation became ill.
                  difficult to implement in community-based practices.          On April 20, 2003, Sunnybrook and Women’s closed its
                                                                                SARS unit and its ICU. Canada’s largest trauma centre
                  More problematic was the lack of a system to distribute       stopped accepting trauma patients. Investigators from
                  the necessary protective gear. The Ontario Medical            the CDC were invited north to join a team attempting to
                  Association proposed that the fastest strategy was for        shed light on how health care workers using all recom-
                  family doctors to buy their own supplies where they could,    mended precautions could have been infected. The team
                  and apply for reimbursement later. A growing number of        concluded that direct contact with the patient or a contam-
                  family physicians, however, were concerned by the lack        inated environment might have led health care workers
                  of provincial support. On April 15, Drs. D’Cunha and          to contaminate themselves as they removed their protective
                  Young convened a meeting of family doctors, hospital          gear; alternatively, the patient’s coughing or the assisted
                  CEOs, and chiefs of emergency medicine at a downtown          ventilation might have led to airborne spread.
                  hotel. Family doctors left the meeting frustrated that the
                  province had still not developed a plan to distribute         The concept that minor breaches in protocol led to
                  protective equipment to physicians and their office staff.    infection was upsetting to some professionals who saw
                  On April 21, 2003, almost four weeks after the Province       these findings as a veiled criticism. The possibility that
                  of Ontario declared an emergency, the province finally        their own inadvertent and minor breaches in protocol
                  used its vaccine distribution network to provide family       could lead to infection was disturbing to some
                  doctors with protective equipment.                            professionals who saw these observations both as further
                                                                                evidence of the risks of SARS care and also as an indirect
                                                                                criticism. However, most physicians and nurses had little
                    D   I S C U S S I O N                P   O I N T            recent experience with droplet precautions for a virus
                                                                                such as SARS. Hospitals redoubled their efforts to train
                    During the SARS outbreak, several family physicians
                                                                                health care workers covering SARS units.
                    were infected with SARS. Because most people visit
                    their family doctor (rather than an emergency department)
                                                                                Sunnybrook and Women’s continued to carry the largest
                    when they are unwell, family doctors need protocols,
                                                                                volume of SARS patients in the GTA, but many of its
                    protective equipment, and prompt information during
                                                                                physicians with relevant expertise or experience were
                    infectious disease outbreaks. How can we better
                                                                                now ill or in quarantine. The hospital’s administrators,
                    support community physicians during extraordinary
                                                                                clinical chiefs, and involved clinicians put out desperate
                    situations? How can we improve communication
                                                                                requests for support through numerous channels. Other
                    between public health officials and the primary care
                                                                                Toronto institutions were either struggling with their
                    sector? What about other community care agencies?
                                                                                own SARS load or unwilling to help. One sister hospital
                    How do they fit into the scheme of disease surveillance
                                                                                eventually sent one senior resident to help with general
                    and outbreak response?
                                                                                medicine coverage, freeing up on-site staff to concentrate
                                                                                on SARS patients.
S A R S




                  2E.3 Transmission of SARS to Protected                        The military sent a critical care specialist. One physician
                       Health Care Workers                                      arrived from the United Kingdom, another came from
                                                                                Montreal, and the chairman of medicine at the University
f r o m




                  On April 13, 2003, on the Sunnybrook and Women’s
                  SARS unit, a family doctor who may have been infected         of Ottawa offered to assemble reinforcements if necessary.
                  with the SARS virus while caring for several members of       Further support came only after the province retained a
                  the religious group cluster began to suffer from              private placement agency to help with recruitment, but
                                                                                the agency’s pay scales for professionals would later
L e a r n i n g




                  increasing shortness of breath. He was transferred to the
                  ICU. Once there, non-invasive devices were used to            become a point of contention.




                  36        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

                                                                 rapidly.” Some informants have since speculated that
 D   I S C U S S I O N                  P O I N T                WHO officials were concerned about the appearance of
                                                                 a double standard favouring Toronto. WHO travel
 Ontario is the only province that has not adopted regional      advisories had already been issued for Hong Kong and
 administration of health care. The merits of regionalization    Guangdong, and advice against non-essential travel to
 in general are subject to ongoing evaluation. However,          Beijing and China’s Shanxi Province was given on the
 the GTA lacks any truly regional plan for clinical services     same day as the Toronto advisory.
 or health emergencies. More generally, clinical jurisdic-
 tions across Canada do not have defined response                Singapore had 189 probable cases on April 23, 2003
 teams for health emergencies that can move between              compared with 140 for Toronto, as well as transmission
 hospitals, let alone across regions or provincial boundaries.   at a community market. Epidemic curves comparing the
 The Canadian Medical Association has proposed a ‘grid           outbreaks in Toronto and Singapore are strikingly similar
 system’ for personnel to support health emergencies.            (see Chapter 11). However, Singapore’s management of
 Should a system of health emergency response teams              the outbreak, not least its communications strategy, was
 be created within and across regions and provinces?             superbly organized and reflected a remarkable degree of
                                                                 social solidarity that could not have been lost on WHO.
Meanwhile, in British Columbia, the transmission of              The Committee has also learned that regional WHO
SARS to a nurse caring for SARS patients forced the              offices had different levels of interaction with nations
closure of a ward at the Royal Columbian Hospital near           affected by SARS, and were therefore more or less able to
Vancouver on April 19, 2003. This was the first case of          vouch for the containment of the outbreak.
secondary transmission in British Columbia; the other
three probable SARS patients in British Columbia had             The WHO travel advisory criteria themselves came under
contracted the disease outside the country.                      intense criticism—they included the presence of at least
                                                                 60 probable SARS cases, export of SARS to other countries,
2E.4 WHO Travel Advisory                                         as well as community spread. Yet none of these criteria
                                                                 have ever been validated as reasons for issuing a travel
As the Easter and Passover holidays approached, public           advisory. For example, the absolute number of cases
health officials braced themselves for a large spike of          in an outbreak is largely a function of the size of a
cases emanating from the religious group cluster. Both           community. Issuing a travel advisory does not prevent
public health officials and clergy stressed repeatedly that      residents of a SARS-affected area from leaving and taking
people under quarantine should remain home, and avoid            SARS with them. Indeed, of the six people thought to
public religious services. Catholic churches also instituted     have spread SARS from Canada, only one was a visitor




                                                                                                                              C a n a d a
precautionary measures—communion wafers were placed              returning home after a trip to Canada. Finally, “spread
in hands rather than mouths, and confessions took place          into the community” was never explicitly defined—if a
outside the usual booths. At diverse religious gatherings        nurse with SARS infects his/her spouse, is this considered
handshakes were replaced with smiles.                            community transmission?

The expected wave never occurred. By April 23, 2003,




                                                                                                                              i n
only one individual—a member of the religious group—               D   I S C U S S I O N              P O I N T
had developed SARS in the previous two weeks. But just


                                                                                                                              H e a l t h
                                                                   Whether the WHO travel advisory was justified or not is
as confidence within the city began to grow, WHO issued
                                                                   debatable. What is beyond debate is the fact that the
an unprecedented advisory, recommending that visitors
                                                                   economic and social impact of such advisories can be
to Toronto postpone all but the most essential travel.
                                                                   devastating. What is the process whereby different
The United Nations agency was concerned that “a small
                                                                   nations and international agencies such as WHO
number of persons with SARS, now in other countries in
                                                                   generate criteria for travel advisories, and proceed to
                                                                                                                              P u b l i c



the world, appear to have acquired the infection while
                                                                   issue them? What are the benefits and harms of travel
in Toronto.”
                                                                   advisories? In the case of Canada, to what extent was
                                                                   international confidence in our ability to manage SARS
Three months after WHO issued its travel advisory against
                                                                   undermined by lack of coordination among jurisdictions,
Toronto, Health Canada officials remain mystified about
                                                                   shortage of data, and the lack of a coherent
                                                                                                                              o f




WHO’s reasoning and motivation. As one Health Canada
                                                                   communications plan?
physician told the Committee, “The travel advisory was
                                                                                                                              R e n e w a l




an absolute stunner... We were of the belief, based on the
epidemiologic data, that the outbreak was dwindling



..........................................................................................                               37
                  .................................................................................................

                                                                                By mid-May, all levels of government were presenting a
                  2F. Between the Waves                                         unified picture to the public that SARS had been contained.
                        (April 24, 2003 - May 22, 2003)                         Rather than presenting data about the cumulative
                       “I can tell you definitely we are in better shape        number of people labelled with probable or suspect SARS,
                       today than we have been in a month…Where did             health officials began to highlight the declining number
                       [the WHO] come from? Who did they see? Who               of “active” cases and the number of new cases—figures
                       did they talk to? Did they go to our hospitals, did      that were not only more reflective of disease activity but
                       they go to our clinics, did they go anywhere? They       also less dramatic. Health Canada began to issue
                       sit somewhere, I understand Geneva, I don’t even         bulletins only weekly, and reported in its May 21, 2003
                       know where the hell they came from, but Geneva or        update that no Canadian had experienced the onset of
                       someplace and they make decisions…”                      symptoms for over a month.

                       —Mayor Mel Lastman, at a press conference, April         It appeared that the total number of cases had reached a
                        23, 2003                                                plateau—140 probable and 178 suspect infections.
                                                                                Twenty-four Canadians had died, all in Ontario.
                  The WHO-issued travel advisory came just as local and
                  provincial health officials felt that they were winning the   2F.1     Hospital Infection Control
                  battle against SARS. This perception was strengthened by
                                                                                Starting in late April 2003, hospitals began to ease their
                  media spokespersons, front-line clinicians, and by the
                                                                                infection control precautions. Employees working outside
                  federal government. The Prime Minister also announced
                                                                                designated SARS areas were, in most hospitals, relieved of
                  the formation of the National Advisory Committee on
                                                                                their obligations to wear personal protective equipment
                  SARS and Public Health.
                                                                                for all patient contact. Rules regarding the minimum
                                                                                distance separating co-workers during meals were relaxed.
                  The WHO advisory, which was initially to have been
                                                                                Hospitals began increasing the number of patients allowed
                  in place for at least three weeks, was withdrawn on
                                                                                visitors. Relieved that SARS had passed, staff went back
                  April 30, 2003 after visits to Geneva by a delegation that
                                                                                to their usual routines. Hindsight would reveal that
                  included Ontario Health Minister Tony Clement and the
                                                                                vigilance for SARS and stringent protective measures should
                  Public Health Commissioner, Dr. D’Cunha. In return,
                                                                                have been maintained for at least a few more weeks.
                  Canadian officials gave assurances to WHO that they
                  would intensify screening of travellers to and from
                                                                                Provincial directives required hospitals to isolate patients
                  Canada to prevent export of the disease.
                                                                                with fever and respiratory symptoms in either the hospital
                                                                                or the emergency department until SARS had been ruled
                  On May 14, 2003, WHO removed Toronto from the list
                                                                                out, but there was no recommendation for formal, hospital-
                  of areas with recent local transmission. This was widely
                                                                                based surveillance programs. The SAC had actively discussed
                  understood to mean that the outbreak had come to an
                                                                                the need for heightened surveillance. Its functions,
                  end. Consistent with the notion that the disease was
                                                                                however, were being wound down. Public health officials
                  contained, the Premier of Ontario lifted the emergency
                                                                                viewed syndromic surveillance as a matter for institutional
                  on May 17. Directives continued to reinforce the need
                                                                                infection control and outside their mandate; they lacked
                  for enhanced infection control practices in health care
                                                                                resources to implement such a program in any case.
                  settings. Code Orange status for hospitals was revoked, and
                  the Ontario government announced a provincial panel to
                                                                                Hospitals responded by treating all patients admitted
                  study the response to SARS, chaired by Dr. David Walker,
                                                                                with community-acquired pneumonia as potential SARS
                  dean of medicine at Queen’s University. The Provincial
                                                                                cases until proven otherwise. Most took special precautions
S A R S




                  Operations Centre was dismantled. The physician-in-chief
                                                                                with inpatients who developed respiratory symptoms
                  of a major teaching hospital later observed that there was
                                                                                suggestive of infectious disease. Some hospitals also did
                  “a great and understandable rush to make things normal
                                                                                “fever surveillance.” For example, at York Central Hospital,
                  again after SARS I.”
                                                                                all inpatients had their temperature checked twice daily.
f r o m




                                                                                Chest x-rays were ordered for all York Central inpatients
                                                                                with fever and respiratory symptoms and they were
                                                                                isolated promptly; and until SARS could be ruled out, a
                                                                                specialist in lung diseases assessed and treated all
L e a r n i n g




                                                                                pneumonia patients in isolation. Similar measures were
                                                                                used in Singapore health care facilities.



                  38        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

Although infection control practitioners attempted to            2F.2     North York General Hospital
institute comprehensive surveillance programs in some
hospitals, such a program alone requires approximately 2         On three separate occasions in April and May 2003, officials
full-time staff members for a 500-bed hospital, more than        at North York General Hospital invited experts to investigate
the majority of hospitals have on staff for all infection        potential SARS cases. Those involved in adjudicating the
control tasks. At North York General Hospital, for               cases were a ‘who’s who’ of leaders in the fight against
example, one full-time and one part-time infection               SARS. Investigations at North York at times involved
control practitioner were responsible for 425 acute care         prominent infectious disease specialists, Toronto Public
beds. The infection control director, Dr. Barbara                Health physicians, Health Canada personnel, and visiting
Mederski, occupied the role without any salary, protected        experts from the CDC. Assessment was repeatedly
time, or even an office. In the absence of a directive, and      bedevilled by the lack of an ‘epidemiologic link’—a
with ongoing budgetary concerns, instituting full                connection between what, clinically, could be a patient
syndromic surveillance was not seen by most hospitals as         with SARS and a source for his or her infection.
necessary or feasible.
                                                                 Between April 20 and May 7, three psychiatric patients
As well, hospitals were not able to access any baseline          developed pneumonia. All had been on the seventh floor
data on rates of similar respiratory infections prior to         of North York General Hospital. One had come back to
SARS. These baseline data would have been important in           hospital through the emergency department. He was
assessing whether the rates of respiratory illness being         placed in a waiting area with a mask, but paced constantly
observed were unusually high. The corollary was that             and, to the concern of the staff, frequently removed his
hospitals lacked established surveillance networks with          mask. All three patients were isolated and managed as
real-time pooling of data and rapid expert analysis.             potential SARS cases, although no epidemiologic link to
                                                                 other cases could be identified. The assessment team had
                                                                 divergent views as to whether the clinical picture was
  D   I S C U S S I O N                 P O I N T                consistent with SARS—but in the end, chiefly because
                                                                 there were no epidemiologic links to known SARS patients
  Infection control programs in hospitals function as a
                                                                 and negative laboratory tests, they ruled out a new cluster.
  parallel system to public health efforts in the community.
  Infection control practitioners are responsible for tracking
                                                                 Meanwhile, unbeknownst to the hospital administration,
  and managing hospital-acquired infections, educating
                                                                 several elderly patients on the orthopaedic ward (4 West)
  other health care workers, and reinforcing proper
                                                                 had been fighting what were at first believed to be typical
  precautions. The Canadian Hospital Epidemiology
                                                                 post-operative lung infections. Among them was a 96-




                                                                                                                                 C a n a d a
  Committee advises that systemic problems in our
                                                                 year-old man with a fractured hip. Through means still
  current health care system include “insufficient time
                                                                 unknown, illness spread from 4 West over the next few
  devoted to learning infection control practices for all
                                                                 weeks to other patients and to several visitors and staff.
  health care providers” and “little, if any, monitoring of
                                                                 On April 29, an intensive care unit nurse from North
  infection control practices and few consequences for
                                                                 York General was admitted to Toronto General Hospital
  non-compliance.” The high rates of transmission to
                                                                 with a respiratory illness. She had cared for an 88-year-old




                                                                                                                                 i n
  health care workers during SARS indicated that many
                                                                 patient from 4 West who had been transferred to the
  had “limited awareness of the correct precautions and/or
                                                                 North York ICU with fever, respiratory compromise, and


                                                                                                                                 H e a l t h
  how to apply them.” A recent survey found that nearly
                                                                 confusion on April 26 and subsequently died. At first, the
  80% of Canadian hospitals do not meet the standard
                                                                 nurses’ serology was negative for SARS, but test results
  recommended by the Canadian Infection Control Alliance
                                                                 later were positive. In hindsight, the 88-year-old was
  of one infection control practitioner per 175 beds. More
                                                                 probably part of a growing SARS cluster on 4 West.
  than 60% of hospitals do not have an infection control
                                                                                                                                 P u b l i c


  director with advanced qualifications (an MD or PhD) in
                                                                 In mid-May physicians and nurses in the emergency
  infectious diseases, medical microbiology, or infection
                                                                 department assessed family members of the 96-year-old
  control. Should Canada establish higher national
                                                                 man with symptoms suggestive of SARS, and they were
  standards for infection control within hospital? Should
                                                                 increasingly anxious about a continuation of the
  provinces be initiating and funding a major overhaul of
                                                                 outbreak. Radiologists also expressed concerns to
  hospital infection control capacity? How should we as a
                                                                                                                                 o f




                                                                 colleagues about sets of suspicious x-rays. Taking their
  country confront the shortage in infection control
                                                                 cue from public health officials and citing the
  practitioners and experts?
                                                                                                                                 R e n e w a l




                                                                 epidemiologic uncertainty about how all these cases




..........................................................................................                                 39
                  .................................................................................................

                  could be linked to each other, the hospital’s infection
                  control director and vice president of medical affairs tried
                                                                                   2G. SARS II
                  to reassure emergency physicians and nurses at a tense                  (May 23, 2003 - June 30, 2003)
                  meeting on May 20.                                                   “SARS I was not avoidable. We were struck by
                                                                                       lightning. Everything after that was.”
                    D   I S C U S S I O N                 P O I N T
                                                                                       —Dr. Richard Schabas, Chief of Staff,
                    During the SARS outbreak, Health Canada and Ontario                 York Central Hospital
                    posted divergent definitions for probable and suspect
                    SARS cases. Both jurisdictions revised the definitions         On May 23, barely one week after WHO had declared
                    intermittently. Some critics argued that the Ontario           Toronto free of local transmission, health officials
                    definition put undue emphasis on close contact with a          acknowledged that SARS had not been defeated. The
                    probable or suspect SARS case, leading to a focus on           province issued a press release announcing that five
                    specific epidemiologic links and missed clusters of            people were under investigation for SARS. Anyone who
                    SARS. The definition was revised on May 26 after the           had visited St. John’s between May 9 and 20 or North
                    second wave of SARS had begun. The new definition              York General Hospital between May 13 and 23 was
                    allowed for exposure to a health care setting with SARS        ordered into quarantine. North York General Hospital
                    patients, and no longer required evidence for close            immediately closed its doors to all new admissions,
                    personal contact to label a suspect case. Critics of the       except for SARS patients. By this time, SARS had already
                    Health Canada definition felt that it led to under-diagnosis   spread not only within North York General Hospital but
                    of SARS by excluding cases if there was an alternative         also to patients who had been transferred from St. John’s
                    diagnosis for the relevant symptoms. On May 29, Health         to the Toronto General site of the University Health
                    Canada’s definition was revised to emphasize that the          Network, The Scarborough Hospital, General Division,
                    alternative diagnosis must “fully explain” the clinical        and Baycrest Centre for Geriatric Care.
                    picture. How should case definitions be constructed
                    during infectious disease outbreaks? Did Canada have           Despite extensive investigations by Toronto Public
                    two definitions of SARS—one set by the federal govern-         Health, Health Canada and the CDC, the exact chain of
                    ment apparently based on F/P/T consensus, and another          events leading to the second wave of the SARS outbreak
                    in Ontario where the outbreak was being fought?                remains a mystery. In fact, a definitive link between the
                                                                                   first outbreak and the cases on the orthopaedic unit
                                                                                   (4 West) has yet to be established, although officials have
                  Meanwhile, St. John’s Rehabilitation Hospital had a              suggested different possibilities. How the psychiatric
                  steady flow of patients from other institutions, including       patients fit into the overall picture is also unknown, and
                  a transfer from 4 West at North York General Hospital.           may never be definitively solved.
                  During the third week of May, staff at St. John’s informed
                  senior management that three patients were exhibiting            With SARS II underway, all hospitals in the GTA were
                  SARS-like symptoms, and a call went out to Toronto               asked to resume previously abandoned infection-control
                  Public Health. The hospital immediately instituted all           procedures. Only four hospitals were designated as SARS
                  the appropriate precautions. Still chasing down 30 to 40         facilities. (The comparative impact of this alternative
                  possible cases of SARS per day, personnel at Toronto Public      approach to handling the SARS caseload is analyzed in
                  Health agreed by telephone that there was a respiratory          Chapter 8.) These four hospitals were termed the SARS
                  outbreak, but suggested that SARS was not the likely             Alliance. North York General’s medical staff and
                  culprit—as at North York General Hospital, no epidemiologic      administration staff rallied and rapidly converted their
                  link could be established. Toronto Public Health staff
S A R S




                                                                                   institution into a major SARS centre. The General site of
                  visited the hospital on May 22. Discussion again focused         The Scarborough Hospital also geared up rapidly to take
                  primarily on establishing an epidemiologic link to the           on a large caseload. St. Michael’s Hospital gradually took
                  patients. None was found.                                        on the mandate of managing complex SARS patients,
f r o m




                                                                                   consistent with its tertiary provider role. Sir William Osler
                                                                                   Health Centre in Etobicoke faced the greatest challenge
                                                                                   in organizing a SARS service, but ultimately provided
                                                                                   west-end coverage for the Alliance.
L e a r n i n g




                  40        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

The SAC reconvened. In the absence of the declaration            On June 10, largely because of the tangled chain of
of a general provincial emergency, the OMHLTC now took           events at North York General Hospital, but also because
a lead role with local public health officials in coordinating   of mounting pressure from nursing associations and
the outbreak response. A SARS Operations Centre was set          unions, opposition politicians, and the media, the
up in Ministry offices at 80 Grosvenor Street. Two assistant     Province of Ontario announced a formal arm’s-length
deputy ministers jointly oversaw the institutional and           investigation into the SARS crisis, headed by Ontario
clinical liaison functions. Dr. Jim Young brought his            Superior Court Justice Archie Campbell.
considerable experience back to the table, and chaired
many of the meetings of the new SARS executive group.
A number of physicians and administrators, mindful of
                                                                 2H. SARS and the
the experience with SARS I, urged that one person be                 Health Care Worker
given clear authority to be in charge of the outbreak, but
the problem of multiple leaders recurred.                        On June 30, Nelia Laroza, a 51-year-old nurse at North
                                                                 York General Hospital became the first Canadian health
Meanwhile, public health officials began, once again, the        care worker to die from SARS. Hundreds of friends and
meticulous work of interviewing patients and tracking            colleagues, along with the Premier of Ontario and the
down contacts. There was considerable fatigue and frus-          Minister of Health and Long-Term Care, gathered at
tration on the front lines, but also some mitigating features.   St. Michael’s Cathedral to pay tribute. A second nurse,
The outbreak was smaller, the virus was better understood,       Tecla Lin, died on July 19, and a family physician,
and the necessary precautions and routines were established.     Nestor Santiaga Yanga, died on August 13.
By the end of May, 48 probable and 25 suspect cases had
been identified in the second outbreak. Again, transmission      Perhaps no segment of society was hit harder during the
had been limited primarily to hospital patients, health          outbreak than health care workers, a group that accounted
care workers, and their families. Toronto was added back         for over 40% of SARS infections in the Toronto outbreak.
to the WHO list of areas with local transmission, but            For many, the knowledge that SARS patients included
WHO did not issue a travel advisory against the city.            colleagues and friends was a source of considerable stress
                                                                 and anxiety. And for those who were afflicted, the
A Clinical Advisory Team working with the Ministry put           memories are intense. In the words of one health care
out a call for volunteers in May, and a number of American       professional hospitalized for three weeks with SARS,
infectious disease physicians and hospital epidemiologists       “I was forced at once to confront the fact that I might
offered to come to Toronto. Meanwhile, as noted above,           not survive the infection...I was stepping into uncharted
the province retained a private health care personnel            waters, a most unnerving adventure.”




                                                                                                                                 C a n a d a
agency as sole-source provider of additional physicians
and nurses for the involved institutions. Organized              At focus groups convened for the Committee, nurses and
medicine was later critical of the contract, noting that         support staff expressed frustration with communication
Canadian physicians who had volunteered to help were             delays, impractical or unrealistic directives, and the
channelled through the agency. Other informants shrugged         inconsistent application of rewards and incentives for
                                                                 those working in high-risk situations. Hospital employees




                                                                                                                                 i n
off the criticism, pointing out that the agency was able to
deliver qualified personnel in the face of a planning and        described a wide range of feelings—including fear, anger,
process void.                                                    guilt, and confusion—as they struggled with personal risks,


                                                                                                                                 H e a l t h
                                                                 social isolation, and stigmatization of their families. While
As May turned into June, a few setbacks occurred.                most also noted a heightened sense of pride, teamwork,
A medical student had been placed in quarantine after            and solidarity, others experienced post-traumatic stress
potential SARS exposure during an obstetrics rotation at         disorder, and a minority felt they needed to change careers.
North York General Hospital. Two days after his quarantine
                                                                                                                                 P u b l i c



had expired, he developed symptoms while working in              Nurses have long voiced concerns that their knowledge
obstetrics at Mount Sinai Hospital. Five women and their         and experience is not taken seriously by senior decision
newborns, as well as a number of staff, were quarantined.        makers. At North York General Hospital, nurses alleged
Another incident involved 1,700 students at a high               that administrators ignored their warnings of an impending
school in Markham who were quarantined after a student           second SARS outbreak. Nurses also expressed concerns
                                                                                                                                 o f




at their school fell ill.                                        that the SARS unit at North York General Hospital was
                                                                 overloaded, and that suspect cases were being treated in
                                                                                                                                 R e n e w a l




                                                                 the emergency department with only curtains for
                                                                 isolation. It may not be a coincidence that North York



..........................................................................................                                41
                  .................................................................................................

                  nurses lacked a key advocate—the position of Chief Nursing
                  Officer lay vacant throughout most of the SARS outbreak.
                                                                                2I. Epilogue
                  At the same time, the political polarization around SARS          “In our drive to technology in the 1980s and
                  has left lasting scars in other ways. A hospital adminis-         1990s, we forgot the basics.”
                  trator who led a successful SARS team later lamented the
                  mass grievance campaigns launched by organized                    —Dr. Bill Sibbald, Physician in Chief, Sunnybrook
                  nursing in Ontario to protest special rewards for nurses           and Women’s.
                  working in SARS units: “It was like being in a war and
                  having your own soldiers shooting at you.”                    We were fortunate that the SARS virus is biologically
                                                                                handicapped. At least in the vast majority of cases, it
                                                                                requires prolonged, close contact to make the short jump
                    D   I S C U S S I O N               P O I N T
                                                                                from one human being to another. SARS has been
                    SARS has provoked welcome discussion of the occupa-         contained, at least temporarily—not by the genomic
                    tional culture in health care. Notwithstanding popular      revolution, not by advanced pharmaceuticals, but by
                    perceptions, it appears there was only one case of inter-   old-fashioned public health measures like hand washing,
                    institutional transmission of SARS by a part-time worker    infection control procedures, isolation of cases, and
                    moving between facilities. But casualization has other      tracing and quarantine of contacts.
                    downsides, including attenuation of a sense of workplace
                    community and a reduced awareness of infection control      What the SARS outbreak showed, perhaps more than
                    protocols, both essential for front-line workers faced      anything else, is the power of public health. The best
                    with an outbreak such as SARS. The Canadian Hospital        current evidence is that without effective public health
                    Epidemiology Committee also notes that hourly pay for       measures, SARS would have eventually sickened millions
                    casual staff offers them an incentive to work while ill—    of people on this shrinking planet, causing not hundreds
                    a practice that, post-SARS, health care facilities have     of deaths, but countless thousands. The next outbreak,
                    actively discouraged.                                       however, may be even more insidious than SARS.
                                                                                Canada may have to deal with a deadly airborne virus,
                                                                                or a virus transmitted via droplets but with such a long
                  Countless health care workers faced a fundamental             incubation period that quarantine would be worthless.
                  conflict between self-preservation, and a professional        Will we be ready?
                  obligation to serve the greater good. Only a small
                  number refused to treat SARS patients or work on SARS
                  wards. Most willingly volunteered, putting their
                  health—and potentially the health of their families—in
                  jeopardy. Unlike other risks in the clinical setting, such
                  as transmission of HIV or hepatitis from accidental skin
                  punctures, SARS was acute in onset, carried an immediate
                  mortality risk, and had no specific treatment. Perhaps
                  more importantly, it could be transmitted to a health
                  care worker’s children by a goodnight kiss. Hundreds of
                  health care workers isolated themselves from their
                  families during the outbreak, wearing masks at home,
                  sleeping in the basement, taking meals alone, and
                  waiting to see if they would develop tell-tale symptoms.
                  The Committee would like to salute each and every one
S A R S




                  of them for their courage and commitment.
f r o m
L e a r n i n g




                  42        .........................................................................................
                               SARS and Public Health
Chapter 3



THE ROLE AND ORGANIZATION
OF PUBLIC HEALTH
.................................................................................................



The preceding chapter set out a brief chronology of the        sources of contagion. Urbanization in medieval Europe
SARS outbreak as it affected Canada. The SARS experience       lent momentum to concerns about sanitation and disease.
illustrated a variety of issues, some to do with the health    The first English Sanitary Act was passed in 1388, dealing
services system, but many others to do with public health      with offal, slaughterhouses, and “corrupting of the air”.
and the interface between public health and clinical care.     Around 1348, the Republic of Venice appointed three
Except in cases of sudden threats to the health of commu-      guardians of public health to detect and exclude ships
nities such as Walkerton, North Battleford, or SARS,           with passengers affected by pneumonic plague (Black
public health operates in the background and is often          Death). In Marseilles (1377) and Venice (1403), travellers
taken for granted. Many Canadians—including health             from plague-infected areas were detained for 40 days to
care professionals and administrators—accordingly have         protect against transmission of infection; this is the
only a limited understanding of what public health is and      origin of the modern term Quarantine.
how it is organized in Canada. This chapter provides an
overview of the evolution of public health, its organization   From the outset, public health practice has depended on
and funding in Canada, selected comparisons with other         health information, and information in turn presupposes
industrialized nations, and some preliminary thoughts          the existence of surveillance systems and organized data.
on domestic directions for change.                             One such source of data was the "bills of mortality"
                                                               established in London, England in 1532. More than a




                                                                                                                              C a n a d a
                                                               century after this system of death records was initiated,
3A. What is Public Health?                                     John Graunt published his Natural and Political Observations
                                                               made upon the Bills of Mortality (1662), examining deaths
3A.1 The Origins of Public Health
                                                               in London by age, sex, district and social class. By 1766,
More than two thousand years ago, the authors of Greek         the Austrian physician Johan Peter Frank had advocated
mythology had already drawn a distinction between              a comprehensive system of health surveillance as part of




                                                                                                                              i n
curative medicine and prevention or health promotion.          his proposed “medical police”. In 1790, Dr. Frank argued
Asklepios, the Greek god of medicine, was reputed to           that curative and preventive measures had little impact


                                                                                                                              H e a l t h
have had two daughters, Hygiea—the goddess of prevention       on populations where people lived in abject poverty and
and wellness, and Panacea, the goddess of treatment.           squalor. This heralded a tradition of concern for living
Other distant origins of public health surface in Greco-       conditions and social justice that continues today in the
Roman writings associating different diseases with possible    public health ethos.
causes, together with prescriptions for their avoidance.
                                                                                                                              P u b l i c



                                                               In 1842, England’s Edwin Chadwick similarly described
Canadians today sometimes confuse public health with           urban squalor, lack of sanitation, and over-crowding; and
publicly-funded health care. However, until the late           he related these to the incidence of disease and death, as
nineteenth and twentieth centuries, personal health care       well as contrasting life expectancy in different social
was left for individuals to arrange. Threats to collective     classes. His work heralded the beginning of the sanitary
                                                                                                                              o f




health, in contrast, have been taken up as a matter for        movement in Britain. The motives behind the sanitary
community control or regulation wherever mechanisms            movement were mixed as were the arguments for it by
                                                                                                                              R e n e w a l




of governance emerged. In Biblical times, for example,         public health proponents. Some claimed that a more
communities isolated those with leprosy as potential           egalitarian society would be healthier and fairer. Others


..........................................................................................                              43
                  .................................................................................................

                  pointed out the need for healthy labouring classes and         As medical science evolved, and local boards of health
                  soldiers, and the threat of both social instability and        provided infrastructure for implementing inspection and
                  contagion spreading from the teeming industrial slums of       regulation, local public health units in Canada took on
                  Europe. By 1850, Lemuel Shattuck’s “Report of the              other activities. These included pasteurization of milk,
                  Massachusetts Sanitary Commission” also related living         tuberculin testing of cows, oversight of isolation to
                  conditions to infant and maternal mortality and morbidity      contain spread of tuberculosis [TB], management of TB
                  rates. As the sanitary movement spread, communities            sanatoria, quarantine for diverse conditions, and the
                  implemented proper disposal of waste, urban sewage             control of sexually transmitted diseases. The early
                  systems, and supplies of pure water for all, with a dramatic   twentieth century brought an increasing emphasis on
                  improvement in population health.                              maternal and child health. Public health physicians and
                                                                                 nurses took a leading role in developing immunization
                  The tool-kit of public health practice still had few           clinics, well baby clinics, prenatal classes, postnatal visits,
                  individual-level interventions apart from measures such        and education on parenting and childhood nutrition.
                  as vaccination against smallpox. Nonetheless, the science
                  and information supporting public health was improving         The activism of public health in individual- and family-
                  steadily. In England William Farr started to develop the       level interventions was not without occasional territorial
                  General Registry Office in 1836, building on the introduc-     tensions. Some general practitioners voiced complaints
                  tion of a national census in 1801 by classifying causes of     that these salaried and subsidized personnel were taking
                  death. Formal medical certification of death and universal     away their livelihoods and interfering with the development
                  death registration commenced in England and Wales a            of family-based practices. The First World War none-
                  year later. John Snow—the “father of epidemiology”—            theless saw a blush of enthusiasm for public health and
                  published his On the Mode of Communication of Cholera in       the integration of preventive medicine into clinical practice.
                  1849, famously removing the handle of the contaminated         In 1919, the Government of Canada brought together
                  Broad Street pump from whence cholera was spreading.           several pieces of legislation pertaining to food, drugs and
                  Snow’s action was a landmark in public health interven-        control of infectious diseases, and established a national
                  tion to contain a disease outbreak. A critical step forward    Department of Health. This was the same year that the
                  occurred in 1856 when Louis Pasteur published his              Liberal Party cautiously adopted national health insurance
                  observations on the germ theory, allowing microbiology         as a plank in its platform, and the British Columbia
                  to advance rapidly. In 1867, Koch published his famous         Social Welfare Commission began exploring the feasibility
                  postulates for establishing a causal connection between a      of a state-sponsored health insurance scheme.2 But while
                  specific microbe and a disease. Such connecting threads        Medicare was several decades away, public health
                  in public health thinking have proven durable: only            measures were already well-established across Canada.
                  weeks before release of the present report, The Lancet
                  published an article by Kuiken et al arguing that the          Following the Great War, mainstream medicine still had
                  novel SARS-associated coronavirus satisfies a modernized       few specific remedies to palliate or cure disease. Surgical
                  version of Koch's postulates.1                                 techniques were crude, and drugs limited to a handful of
                                                                                 compounds such as digitalis for congestive heart failure,
                  In this country, Lower Canada established a Board of           quinine for malaria, and arsenicals for syphilis. Insulin
                  Health in 1832; Upper Canada followed suit a year later.       would not appear on the clinical scene until 1923. Public
                  Ontario passed the first provincial public health act in       health, meanwhile, was progressing steadily. Toxoids
                  Canada in 1884, and other provinces soon passed similar        were a key breakthrough in immunization strategies; a
                  legislation. These acts provided for the establishment of      toxoid is a bacterial toxin treated to render it harmless
                  local boards of health with the authority to remedy            but still capable of inducing immunity to the disease.
                  hazards to health and to appoint medical officers of           On into the mid-1920s, diphtheria was the leading cause
S A R S




                  health. In these early years, boards often hired medical       of death among children. The widespread use of
                  officers of health only when a disease outbreak struck,        antitoxin had only a minor impact on the incidence of
                  and dismissed them once the danger was over. Local             the disease. After the discovery of diphtheria toxoid, the
                  boards of health were heavily involved in the mid-             Connaught Laboratories in Toronto produced toxoid on a
f r o m




                  nineteenth century with quarantine and immunization            massive scale and proved its effectiveness with massive
                  as well as combating a series of epidemics of smallpox         field trials of childhood immunization in Ontario
                  and cholera.                                                   starting in 1926. The same period saw pertussis toxoid
                                                                                 introduced for case contacts and epidemics. Tetanus
L e a r n i n g




                                                                                 toxoid and a string of other triumphs for immunization




                  44        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

and vaccination—most notably the introduction of an           production of education materials, and product labelling.
effective vaccine for polio by Jonas Salk in 1956 and the     Various stakeholders from different levels of governments
eradication of smallpox—followed later.                       to the Heart and Stroke Foundation are active in encouraging
                                                              smoking cessation and promoting the adoption of
Notwithstanding these triumphs, indeed perhaps in part        healthier diets. Public health researchers unquestionably
because of them, public health was moving into a back-        helped generate the epidemiologic evidence that linked
ground role. The growing effectiveness and technological      CHD to these risk factors. But even for a clear-cut case
sophistication of clinical medicine captured the public       such as prevention of heart disease, the positive influence
imagination. After insulin came sulpha drugs and              of public health has been as much indirect as direct.
penicillin, and then a massive armamentarium of anti-         Similar challenges arise in delineating the role of public
biotics, including treatments for tuberculosis. Surgical      health in areas such as injury prevention or, a fortiori,
and related techniques blossomed. Open heart surgery,         interventions to redress the profound and persisting
dialysis, joint replacement, pacemakers, kidney trans-        variations in health status across socioeconomic strata
plantation—these and other innovations featured promi-        in Canadian society.
nently in the mass media of the 1950s and 1960s. Their
marginal yields at a population level were meaningful         Not surprisingly, even within the public health community,
but relatively small. Increasing societal prosperity and      debates occur between those with more or less expansive
enlightened social policy accompanying economic               views of the mandate of public health. But there is little
growth were great catalysts for overall improvements in       disagreement on two points. First, existing levels—and
life expectancy. Across all industrialized nations, public    allocations—of resources are suboptimal to permit the
health interventions also helped drive communicable           deployment of many interventions that have the potential
diseases down the mortality lists through the middle and      to avoid premature death or disability. Second, public
latter parts of the twentieth century.                        health has essential roles in areas such as health protection
                                                              (food and water safety), disease surveillance, and outbreak
Public health, as we have already seen, was not solely        management, and these functions must be given priority.
about control of infectious diseases. Pioneers of public      As we have seen with SARS, questions now exist as to
health in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries             whether the Canadian public health system is minimally
investigated the causes of, and advocated action against,     equipped and organized to deal with even a modest-sized
nutritional (scurvy), occupational (cancer of the scrotum),   outbreak of a new communicable disease.
and environmental (lead poisoning) diseases, and urged
measures to limit inequalities in health across education     In sum, for about a century and a half in Canada, there
and income levels. Public health practitioners remained       has been an organized public health presence, often little




                                                                                                                              C a n a d a
at the forefront throughout the twentieth century in          noticed, but nevertheless contributing to a steadily
championing legislative and regulatory initiatives to         increasing life expectancy and quality of life for Canadians.
reduce the burden of premature and avoidable deaths           Various analyses of the improvements in health during
and injuries along with preventable diseases.                 the twentieth century have highlighted that modern
                                                              clinical medicine is important, but broad social changes




                                                                                                                              i n
Nonetheless, the shift in mortality and morbidity profiles    and public health measures deserve the lion’s share of
away from communicable diseases to chronic non-               the credit for the 25-year increase in life expectancy
communicable diseases created challenges for public           across industrialized nations, including the dramatic


                                                                                                                              H e a l t h
health practice. Coronary heart disease [CHD] is a useful     reduction of infant mortality from 20% to less than 1%
example. The decline in incidence of CHD in Canada is         in most developed countries.3 Influential social and
unequivocal. The decline antedates introduction and           economic changes have included smaller families, higher
widespread adoption of effective agents for treatment of      standards of living with better nutrition, and adequate
dyslipidemias (e.g., high cholesterol), and the impact of     housing. However, public health has played a huge role
                                                                                                                              P u b l i c



improvements in physical activity profiles is uncertain.      in securing safe food and water supplies, implementing
Some of the decline appears to be attributable to smoking     pasteurization, and developing and delivering programs
cessation and adoption of healthier diets. To what can        of vaccination and immunization. The re-emergence of
we attribute changes in those risk factors? Family            infectious diseases, and the continued scope for
physicians and other clinicians are actively engaged in       prevention of the now dominant non-communicable
                                                                                                                              o f




counselling against smoking, and provide pharmaceutical       diseases, both suggest that the yields of prudent new
supports to facilitate smoking cessation, but public health   investments in public health may be substantial.
                                                                                                                              R e n e w a l




policy and education have also played a role through
tobacco taxes, anti-smoking advertising campaigns,


..........................................................................................                              45
                  .................................................................................................


                  3A.2 Defining Modern Public Health                              or moderately abnormal blood lipids greatly exceeds those
                                                                                  arising in the clinically hypertensive or dyslipidemic
                       Practice
                                                                                  minority. Population-based strategies that seek to shift
                  Public health developed over the centuries as society’s         the whole distribution of risk factors have the potential
                  response to threats to the collective health of its citizens,   to exert a much larger impact at a population level.
                  and has an enviable record of contributions to
                  population health status. How do we define public               However, a preventive measure that brings large benefits
                  health practice today?                                          to the community may offer little to each participating
                                                                                  individual—this is Rose’s ‘prevention paradox’.
                  Public health can be described as the science and art of        Changing health habits through individual intervention
                  promoting health, preventing disease, prolonging life and       can be difficult and inefficient; and the gradual adoption
                  improving quality of life through the organized efforts of      of new norms (e.g., in diet and exercise) becomes the
                  society.4 As such, public health combines sciences, skills,     logical way forward. At the same time, ethical concerns
                  and beliefs directed to the maintenance and improvement         dictate that clinicians seek out and offer individualized
                  of the health of all people through collective action.          treatment to the small minority of persons at greatly
                  The programs, services, and institutions involved tend to       elevated risk. The population approach of public health
                  emphasize two things: the prevention of disease, and the        and the individualized approach of clinical medicine are
                  health needs of the population as a whole.5 This popu-          thus complementary: the opportunities for each will
                  lation focus distinguishes public health from the clinical      vary according to the disease and risk factor, and what
                  enterprise that is governed by the Hippocratic imperative       interventions are available. Finding the right balance
                  with its focus on the individual patient. Indeed, delineation   is important.
                  of the boundaries of public health in this regard has been
                  made explicit in Quebec’s 2001 Public Health Act, viz:          When the task of disease prevention and health promo-
                  “Public health actions must be directed at protecting,          tion moves away from precisely identifiable risk factors,
                  maintaining or enhancing the health status and well-            matters become even more complex. The health of
                  being of the general population and shall not focus on          populations and individuals is obviously shaped by a
                  individuals except insofar as such actions are taken for        wide range of factors in the social, economic, natural,
                  the benefit of the community as a whole or a group              built, and political environments. These factors interact
                  of individuals.”6                                               with each other and with innate individual traits such as
                                                                                  genetics, sex, and age. As researchers have delineated the
                  This collective approach means that, as even the brief          complex webs of causation that influence health-related
                  history above has illustrated, public health has long           behaviours and health status, they have articulated a
                  included a regulatory function. Regulation is an effective      population health approach that highlights the need for
                  means of protecting the public from a variety of hazards,       interventions such as regulation, education, community
                  including carriers of infectious diseases, food, drugs,         development and social policy. The extent to which
                  consumer products, pesticides, improper waste disposal,         particular public health units or professionals embrace
                  impure drinking water, recreational water, dangerous            these tools varies, but the population health framework
                  motor vehicles, unsafe workplaces, second-hand smoke,           has usefully integrated analytical perspectives in the
                  and many others. In Canada, all levels of government—           public health field.
                  federal, provincial/territorial, and municipal—are involved
                  in the regulatory functions of public health.                   Public health practice relies heavily on intersectoral
                                                                                  partnerships. Public health professionals must be able to
                  The logic of a collective or population-based approach to       work with a range of disciplines, and form coalitions to
                  traditional public health measures, such as communicable        advocate for mitigation of health risks or implement
S A R S




                  disease control, is self-evident. But a population approach     health-enhancing changes in various environments.
                  can also be efficient in dealing with non-communicable          The voluntary sector is a key partner in public health
                  disease prevention. As Geoffrey Rose7 has argued, risk          today. This includes non-governmental agencies (such as
                  factors for most diseases are typically distributed across a    health charities and professional associations), local
f r o m




                  continuum. A preventive strategy focusing on high-risk          associations of all kinds, community development groups,
                  individuals will deal with the margin of the problem,           recreational associations, business groups, organized
                  and has only a trivial impact on the large proportion of        labour and other workplace collectivities, together with
                  disease occurring in the majority of people who are at          the governmental structures which partly support and
L e a r n i n g




                  moderate risk. For example, the number of cardiovascular        fund them. These groups may be overtly health-
                  events arising in people with slightly raised blood pressure    oriented, or may have primary interests in related areas



                  46        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

such as child development and social welfare. In Canada,                       • Population Health Assessment entails the ability to
the voluntary sector partners with local health agencies,                        understand the health of populations, the factors
as well as federal and provincial/territorial [P/T] govern-                      which underlie good health and those which create
ments in various programs. Joint activities include health                       health risks. These assessments lead to better services
promotion initiatives, and the provision of services,                            and policies.
advocacy and community development. These partici-
                                                                               • Health Promotion. Public health practitioners work
patory approaches are particularly important for
                                                                                 with individuals, agencies, and communities to under-
Aboriginal populations and other marginalized or hard-
                                                                                 stand and improve health through healthy public
to-reach groups.
                                                                                 policy, community-based interventions, and public
                                                                                 participation. Health promotion contributes to and
Over the past decade, many countries have tried to
                                                                                 shades into disease prevention (see below) by catalyzing
define the essential functions of their public health
                                                                                 healthier and safer behaviours. Comprehensive
systems. In Canada, no single accepted list exists,
                                                                                 approaches to health promotion may involve community
although a report of the national Advisory Committee on
                                                                                 development or policy advocacy and action regarding
Population Health (ACPH) recently recommended the
                                                                                 the environmental and socioeconomic determinants
following list of essential functions:
                                                                                 of health and illness.*
• Health Protection. This is a long-standing core                              The Canadian Institutes of Health Research’s [CIHR]
  function for all public health systems. The assurance                        Institute of Population and Public Health recently led a
  of safe food and water, the regulatory framework for                         group of opinion leaders through a process to consider
  control of infectious diseases, and protection from                          the future of Public Health, and identified some examples
  environmental threats are essential to the Public Health                     for each of these functions delineated in Table 1.
  mandate and form much of the body of current public
  health legislation worldwide. Included in this function                      Last, public health also plays a key role in Disaster
  is the provision of expert advice to national regulators                     Response. Many natural disasters not only place imme-
  of food and drug safety.                                                     diate demands on the health care system, but may
                                                                               involve secondary threats to population health through
• Health Surveillance allows for early recognition of
                                                                               contamination of food or water supplies or communicable
  outbreaks, disease trends, health factors, and cases of
                                                                               disease outbreaks.
  illness which in turn allows for earlier intervention
  and lessened impact. Surveillance also assists in our
  understanding of the impacts of efforts to improve                           3B. Governance and Organization




                                                                                                                                               C a n a d a
  health and reduce the impact of disease. For example,
  a new strain of Salmonella occurring in many parts of
                                                                                   of Public Health in Canada
  the country over a short period of time may indicate
                                                                               3B.1 Some Constitutional and
  contamination of a widely-distributed food product.
                                                                                    Legislative Issues
• Disease and Injury Prevention. More than a decade
                                                                               Chapter 9 provides a more detailed treatment of




                                                                                                                                               i n
  ago, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
  in the USA identified that as much as two-thirds of                          constitutional and legislative issues. This introductory
  premature mortality was preventable through the                              overview offers some general context.


                                                                                                                                               H e a l t h
  application of available knowledge. Many illnesses
  can either be prevented or delayed and injuries can be                       Canada’s Constitution Act (formerly the British North
  avoided (e.g., bicycle helmet use). This category of                         America Act of 1867) outlines the division of responsi-
  activity also includes investigation, contact tracing                        bilities between provinces and the federal government,
  and preventive measures targeted at reducing risks of                        and was created at a time when infectious disease and
                                                                                                                                               P u b l i c



  outbreaks of infectious disease. It overlaps with                            other public health concerns were everyday realities.
  health promotion, especially as regards educational                          The Act assigned responsibility for “quarantine and the
  programs targeting safer and healthier lifestyles.                           establishment of marine hospitals” to the federal govern-
                                                                               ment, and (s. 92) the “establishment, maintenance and
                                                                               management of hospitals, asylums, and eleemosynary
                                                                                                                                               o f




                                                                               institutions in and for the province, other than marine
                                                                               hospitals” to the provinces.
                                                                                                                                               R e n e w a l




* The more expansive aspects of health promotion occasionally draw criticism as forms of ‘health imperialism’ or ‘social engineering’.



..........................................................................................                                                47
                  .................................................................................................


                    T   A B L E           1
                    Examples of Programming for Essential Public Health Functions.

                    Essential Function                Programming Examples

                    Population health                 • Population/community health needs assessment;
                    Assessment                        • Health status report, system report card.

                    Health surveillance               • Periodic health surveys;
                                                      • Cancer and other disease registries;
                                                      • Communicable disease reporting;
                                                      • Ongoing analysis of data to identify trends or emerging problems,
                                                        (e.g., recognition of increasing syphilis cases);
                                                      • Report to practitioners of increasing threat, what they need to look for, and intervention
                                                        required.

                    Health promotion                  • Intersectoral community partnerships to solve health problems;
                                                      • Advocacy for healthy public policies;
                                                      • Catalyzing the creation of physical and social environments to support health
                                                        (e.g., bike paths, promoting access to social networks for institutionalized seniors).

                    Disease and injury prevention     • Immunizations;
                                                      • Investigation and outbreak control;
                                                      • Encouraging healthy behaviours (e.g., not smoking, healthy eating, physical activity,
                                                        bicycle helmet use);
                                                      • Early detection of cancers (e.g., organized programs for breast cancer screening).

                    Health protection                 •   Restaurant inspections;
                                                      •   Child care facility inspections;
                                                      •   Water treatment monitoring;
                                                      •   Air quality monitoring/enforcement.


                  Sections 92(13) and 92(16) of the Constitution give                 broader public health mandate, and, apart from the
                  provinces responsibility, respectively, for property and            above-noted regulations, its wording is more permissive
                  civil rights and for matters of a local or private nature.          than prescriptive. It states that the Minister of Health is
                  Both are relevant to the primary authority that provincial          responsible for “the promotion of the physical, mental
                  governments claim in Canada to pass legislation                     and social well-being of the people of Canada, the
                  concerning public health. Federal authority in public               protection of the people of Canada against risks to health
                  health derives from federal powers in diverse areas, such           and the spreading of diseases, and the investigation and
                  as the criminal law, matters of national concern as regards         research into public health, including the monitoring
                  “peace, order, and good government”, quarantine and                 of diseases.”
                  national borders, regulation of interprovincial trade and
                  commerce, and international treaty-making. Jurisdiction,            The uncertainty about federal powers in public health is
                  in short, is mixed.                                                 underscored by the state of disease surveillance. While
S A R S




                                                                                      the Statistics Act and the Department of Health Act provide
                  In Canada, there are federal legislative provisions for the         the Government of Canada with a mandate to collect
                  regulation of food, drugs, and pesticides. The titles of the        information on public health risks of a pan-Canadian
                  Quarantine Act and the Importation of Human Pathogens               nature, Health Canada does not currently have a clear
f r o m




                  Regulations of the Department of Health Act are self-               legal mandate to require provinces/territories to share
                  explanatory, and these laws flow logically from the                 health surveillance data with each other and the federal
                  constitutional division of powers. The Canada Health Act            government. As was evident in the SARS outbreak, these
                  sets out the conditions for receipt of funding for physi-           transfers occur voluntarily.8
L e a r n i n g




                  cian and hospital services, but does not cover public
                  health. Indeed, only the Department of Health Act offers a




                  48        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

For the federal government to exert a stronger coordinating     resources, transportation and recreation are inevitably
and supporting role, one logical avenue is through the use      involved. Lastly, emergency preparedness and response
of federal spending power. That is, the federal government      authorities, including P/T ministries of public security, will
can involve itself in public health by providing condi-         be involved in responding to environmental disasters.
tional funding for public health programs or by entering
into legal contracts to develop public health initiatives.      3B.2 Organization of Public Health
The Population and Public Health Branch of Health                    Services
Canada currently exerts only a limited steering effect
through its program of grants and contributions. These          The situation of primary responsibility for public health
grants and contributions are not directed to other levels       services at the municipal or local level is rooted in a
of government, but to non-profit and non-governmental           tradition that dates back to the time of Elizabeth I. In
organizations. They target areas such as children’s             Canada, primary legislative authority seems to rest with
health, Aboriginal peoples’ health, diabetes, HIV/AIDS,         the provinces and territories, but local public health
Hepatitis C, and tobacco control, among others. There is        remains the front line for battling outbreaks such as
no legislative provision per se for Health Canada’s role in     SARS. The following overview accordingly moves from
these programs. Rather, they are established under the          the local to P/T to federal levels.
broad rubric of the Minister of Health’s authorities in the
Department of Health Act, and funded following Cabinet          There are four patterns of governance of local public
and Treasury Board decisions on policy and funding              health services in Canada.
respectively.
                                                                • Regional Health Authorities/Districts
Public health activities in each province and territory are
                                                                   This is the most common pattern, especially in the
governed by a public health act (or equivalent) and its
                                                                   West and increasingly in the Maritimes. Elected and/or
regulations, as well as by other specific legislation
                                                                   appointed boards are responsible for the provision of
(e.g., Ontario’s Immunization of School Pupils Act). Some
                                                                   health services within a defined geographical area.
public health acts are decades old. Ontario (1983),
                                                                   The governance for public health is thus combined
Saskatchewan (1994), and Quebec (2002) all have modern-
                                                                   with that for other health services. The boards are
ized legislation, and British Columbia proposes to
                                                                   either elected by local residents, or appointed by the
introduce a new act soon. The older acts tend to be
                                                                   provincial government, or a mixture of both. The
mainly concerned with infectious diseases and specific in
                                                                   system is a product of the 1990s and still evolving: for
the powers given to public health officials, while the
                                                                   example, the number of regions and their boundaries
newer acts are more flexible. All public health acts have




                                                                                                                                 C a n a d a
                                                                   change frequently, there is sometimes tension between
regulations; these vary from province to province. The
                                                                   boards and provinces concerning powers, and there
planning and delivery of services is mostly devolved to
                                                                   has been a swing away from elected to appointed
regional/local structures, with responsibility usually
                                                                   members. Despite the instability of these arrangements,
assumed by elected and/or appointed boards.
                                                                   they have the major advantage of promoting the
                                                                   integration of clinical and public health services under




                                                                                                                                 i n
Environmental health illustrates the potential jurisdictional
                                                                   unified governance that is locally responsive to some
ambiguities. The federal and P/T governments all have
                                                                   degree. Regional structures, however, have not solved
legislation bearing on environmental health issues. P/T


                                                                                                                                 H e a l t h
                                                                   the problem of under-investment in public health.
environment ministries may operate water purification
facilities and test water. Municipal governments may            • Regional/District Boards
pass by-laws, provide many environmental services, and
                                                                   In this case, the boards are responsible for public
be involved in enforcement. Local public health agencies
                                                                   health and/or other community-based services within
and/or P/T health ministries are responsible for advising
                                                                                                                                 P u b l i c


                                                                   an area, but do not have oversight of publicly-funded
on human health impacts of environmental problems,
                                                                   personal health services. This is the pattern in parts of
for undertaking inspections and enforcement, and for
                                                                   Newfoundland, and until recently, in New Brunswick.
investigations of environmental health hazards and health
events thought to be environmentally caused. Public
health laboratories undertake some testing, as also do
                                                                                                                                 o f




various federal, provincial, university or contract labora-
tories. Other departments of governments such as natural
                                                                                                                                 R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                                 49
                  .................................................................................................

                  • Quasi-municipal/County                                      Each province or territory has a chief medical officer of
                                                                                health [CMOH] or equivalent. The CMOH may also be
                     This is the earliest pattern, and continues in Ontario.
                                                                                the director of the public health branch of the P/T
                     Local boards are responsible for public health and
                                                                                government, or these may be separate positions. The
                     some other community services. Boards serve either
                                                                                senior public health physician sometimes also holds an
                     single or multiple municipalities and counties, and are
                                                                                Assistant Deputy Minister position. In Quebec, the
                     appointed by the involved municipalities and the
                                                                                Assistant Deputy Minister for public health by law is a
                     province. In large cities, the public health board is
                                                                                physician with a specialist qualification in community
                     usually a committee of city council.
                                                                                medicine. The reporting relationships of the CMOH
                  • Provincial                                                  within the P/T governments vary considerably, as provinces
                                                                                have balanced a desire to ensure the independence of the
                     In Prince Edward Island, services are delivered at the
                                                                                CMOH as a health advocate with the need to integrate
                     provincial level.
                                                                                his or her portfolio into ministries of health.
                  Health Canada, through the First Nations and Inuit
                  Health Branch [FNIHB], has a mandate from the federal         Each province and territory also has public health staff
                  parliament to provide certain public health services to       within the provincial government. These staff typically
                  First Nations communities on reserve. Communities             engage in planning, administering budgets, advising on
                  with “transfer arrangements” with FNIHB have taken on         programs, and providing assistance to local staff for serious
                  responsibility for some or most health services which         incidents. The British Columbia Centre for Disease Control
                  would otherwise be delivered by the federal government,       [BC CDC] was established in 1997 to take responsibility
                  i.e., public health services may be delivered by the          for provincial-level management of infectious disease
                  communities themselves. These arrangements are                prevention and control, including laboratories. Division
                  supported through contribution funding provided by the        directors and other key scientific and medical staff in the
                  federal government.                                           BC CDC hold appointments at the University of British
                                                                                Columbia, and have protected time to enable academic
                  Local service delivery across Canada is through the health    activities. A specific effort is made to ground practices in
                  departments of regional health authorities or districts, or   research evidence. The BC CDC’s budget flows through
                  (in Ontario) through health units and municipal health        the provincial Health Services Authority.
                  departments. The populations served by the relevant units
                  range from 600 to 2.4 million people, with catchment areas    Quebec established the National Public Health Institute
                  from 4 square kilometres to 800,000 square kilometres.        in 1998 by transferring in staff from several regional
                  There are approximately 139 such local/regional agencies      public health departments and the ministry; it oversees
                  serving urban, rural and isolated areas, covering the         the main public health laboratories and centres of
                  population of Canada, exclusive of some Aboriginal            expertise. Unlike the BC CDC, it has a general mandate
                  communities.                                                  that covers prevention, community development and
                                                                                health promotion, healthy living, workplace health, and
                  Each local/regional public health agency has a position       chronic disease as well as infectious diseases. The Institute
                  for a medical officer of health [MOH] - a licensed            includes the Quebec Toxicology Centre, the Screening
                  physician with post-graduate training in public health.       Expertise Centre, and the Poison Control Centre.
                  Smaller health units find it difficult to attract medical
                  officers of health or provide the full range of services.     Many provinces have taken steps to ensure that the local
                  In Saskatchewan, partly for this reason, adjacent districts   administration of public health is not compromised by
                  have arranged to share either the medical officer of          special interests and that provincial standards are upheld.
                  health or the entire public health agency.                    These can be summarized as follows:
S A R S




                                                                                • Delivery of certain programs and services may be
                                                                                  required for the province to flow funds to the local
                                                                                  health unit. There may be lists of core or mandatory
f r o m




                                                                                  programs, together with a monitoring mechanism, with
                                                                                  or without accompanying regulations. Nevertheless,
                                                                                  the level of service provision varies both between and
                                                                                  within provinces/territories.
L e a r n i n g




                  50        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

• The chief medical officer of health may have the             3B.3 The Challenge of Public Health in
  power to intervene anywhere in the province in an
                                                                    Rural and Remote Areas
  emergency.
                                                               As noted earlier, Canada was fortunate that SARS struck
• Medical officers of health at the local level may be
                                                               primarily in Toronto with its comparatively well-developed
  provincial employees, reporting formally to the chief
                                                               public health and health care infrastructure. In many
  medical officer of health.
                                                               parts of the country, capacity to battle public health
• Local boards of health may require the consent of the        threats is limited. The risk of communicable diseases, of
  minister to hire and/or fire medical officers of health.     course, is also contained by the low population density
                                                               of these same areas.
• The Minister of Health generally has the power to
  dismiss local boards of health.
                                                               Canada’s northern territories, for example, comprise
At the federal level, the most relevant organization           0.3% of Canada’s overall population, but 39% of its
vis-à-vis public health is the Population and Public Health    geographic area. In the far north, average life expectancies
Branch [PPHB] of Health Canada. The Branch is head-            are lower than for the rest of Canada, owing to higher
quartered in Ottawa, and has regional offices across           infant mortality rates in Nunavut and the Northwest
Canada. Its components include Centres for Infectious          Territories, higher lung cancer mortality rates in all three
Disease Prevention and Control, Chronic Disease                territories, and substantially higher rates of death from
Prevention and Control, Emergency Preparedness and             unintentional injuries and suicide. The territories have
Response, Surveillance Coordination, and Healthy Human         higher rates of infectious diseases such as tuberculosis and
Development. PPHB has oversight of the National                Chlamydia, higher teen birth rates, and greater incidences
Microbiology Laboratory in Winnipeg and the Laboratory         of smoking and other forms of substance abuse.
for Foodborne Zoonoses in Guelph. Other branches in
Health Canada, particularly the Health Products and Food       More generally, populations residing outside of large
Branch and the Healthy Environments and Consumer               urban centres tend to have lower levels of education,
Safety Branch interact with local public health to a lesser    employment, and income. Small local hospitals cannot
extent. Federal agencies such as the Canadian Food             maintain infection control with highly specialized staff
Inspection Agency [CFIA] also have a role in public health.    as occurs in many urban hospitals. Rural hospitals
                                                               seldom have rooms with respiratory isolation facilities.
In sum, the provincial/territorial presence predominates       And in local public health units, staff multi-task as a
in public health, with most of the delivery of services        matter of course. Public health nurses provide well baby
occurring locally or regionally. The local/regional agencies   and immunization coverage one day, community




                                                                                                                              C a n a d a
have their own governance, but their activities are            development and school visits the next. Similarly, public
constrained by P/T law, regulations, policies, directives      health inspectors deal with issues ranging across water
and conditions of funding. Various federal/provincial/         safety, restaurant and event inspections for food safety,
territorial committees provide some elements of national       potential rabies exposures, enteric disease outbreaks, and
coordination. These include the Advisory Committee on          environmental hazards. In these settings, no function
                                                               can be abandoned to combat an outbreak for more than




                                                                                                                              i n
Population Health and Health Security reporting to the
Conference of Deputy Ministers of Health, the Council of       a few days without introducing new hazards. Most of
Chief Medical Officers of Health, the Canadian Public          these remote areas have a medical officer of health, but


                                                                                                                              H e a l t h
Health Laboratory Network, and many more technical             some positions go unfilled and others are managed by
groups. Domestically, the federal role, apart from specific    part-time clinical physicians. Public health inspector
areas of jurisdiction set out above such as quarantine at      positions remain unfilled for long periods, and few
national borders or regulation of food and drugs, has          smaller health units can afford to hire personnel with
been to support P/Ts and non-governmental organiza-            graduate training in areas such as health promotion or
                                                                                                                              P u b l i c



tions with technical advice, expert resources, advanced        epidemiology. In short, Canadian geography poses
laboratory technology, and national surveillance and           special challenges in the organization and delivery of
statistics. The federal government also funds research         public health services.
relevant to public health through various channels,
including the CIHR and PPHB. Last, the federal
                                                                                                                              o f




government has a lead role in international liaison, as
will be discussed in Chapter 11.
                                                                                                                              R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                              51
                  .................................................................................................

                                                                                   Throughout the latter half of the 1980s, when economic
                  3C. Public Health in the                                         recession was coupled with escalating health care costs,
                      Background                                                   most provinces and territories published reviews of
                                                                                   health and health care. Nearly all of these reports shared
                  We have seen that public health moved to the background          two recommendations: improved control over resources,
                  as the technological capacity of clinical medicine grew          through processes such as integration of services,
                  through the latter half of the twentieth century. In             alignment of incentives, regionalization, and utilization
                  parallel, Canada moved to organize universal prepayment          management; and an increased emphasis on prevention
                  of physicians’ services and hospital care, initiating four       and health promotion. In every province, the first set of
                  decades in which funding of personal health services has         recommendations was operationalized; the latter received
                  taken ever greater priority over public health. Writing in       much less attention.
                  the Royal Commission report that laid the foundations
                  for Canada’s universal medical care insurance system,            The scope and importance of the HIV pandemic became
                  Mr. Justice Emmett Hall and his fellow commissioners             increasingly evident during the 1980s, sparking world-
                  focused on plans to improve access to physician services,        wide concern about infectious diseases. An expert panel
                  and offered only a passing reference to public health:           of the US Institute of Medicine conducted an 18-month
                  “The efforts to improve the quality and availability of          study, culminating in 1992 in a major report—Emerging
                  health services must be supplemented by a wide range of          Infections: Microbial Threats to Health in the United States.10
                  other measures concerned with such matters as housing,           Health Canada’s Laboratory Centre for Disease Control
                  nutrition, cigarette smoking, water and air pollution,           (later restructured inside the Population and Public Health
                  motor vehicle and other accidents, alcoholism and                Branch of Health Canada) also organized an Expert Working
                  drug addiction.”                                                 Group on Emerging Infectious Disease Issues. A multi-
                                                                                   disciplinary group of 40 researchers and practitioners met
                  In 1974, then Health Minister Marc Lalonde published             at Lac Tremblant from December 7-9, 1993, producing a
                  an influential volume entitled A New Perspective on the          declaration whose opening sentences were prophetic:
                  Health of Canadians.9 Lalonde argued that health status
                  was influenced not only by health services and genetics or           “The HIV pandemic has demonstrated that the
                  biology, but also by environmental and lifestyle factors.            world is rapidly becoming a global community.
                  While the “New Perspective” drew positive national and               Global interdependence, massive internal and
                  international responses, its legacy was clouded on two               external population movements, rapid transpor-
                  scores. First, by highlighting the limits to health care             tation, increasing trade and changing social and
                  based on broad population health trends and aggregate                cultural patterns expose large populations to new
                  mortality statistics, the volume understated the value of            and different pathogens and pose new threats to
                  clinical services for relevant outcomes such as disease-             their health and well-being. National boundaries
                  specific mortality, function, and quality of life. In part, it       no longer offer isolation or protection from infectious
                  re-opened the unhelpful divide between advocates of                  diseases, toxic chemicals and hazardous products.”
                  more clinical spending and champions of public and
                  population health. Second, the ‘lifestyle’ terminology,          In its long list of recommendations, the group called for
                  with its emphasis on personal choices, was characterized         “a national strategy for surveillance and control of
                  by some critics as “victim-blaming” because it down-             emerging and resurgent infections,” support and enhance-
                  played the social roots of unhealthy behaviours at the           ment of “the public health infrastructure necessary for
                  individual level. The ”New Perspective” did lend momen-          surveillance, rapid laboratory diagnosis and timely
                  tum to health promotion efforts, presaged the need for           interventions for emerging and resurgent infections,”
                  intersectoral collaboration in public health, and fore-          coordination and collaboration in “setting a national
S A R S




                  shadowed the population health paradigm that now                 research agenda for emerging and resurgent infections,”
                  holds sway. However, it appears to have had little lasting       “a national vaccine strategy,” “a centralized electronic
                  effect on federal or provincial spending in public health.       laboratory reporting system to monitor human and non-
                                                                                   human infections,” and strengthening “the capacity and
f r o m




                                                                                   flexibility to investigate outbreaks of potential emerging
                                                                                   and resurgent infections in Canada.”
L e a r n i n g




                  52        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

Little action was taken apart from some organizational
changes, and most of the Working Group’s recommen-                T   A B L E          2
dations from 1993 remain entirely valid a decade later.
                                                                  Health care funding over six years
Indeed, we essentially recapitulate many of them in
                                                                  (beginning in 2000-01), as per the 2000 Health Accord.
this report.
                                                                  Area of funding                       Amount
Mr. Justice Horace Krever provided a more general call to
action in his 1998 report of the “Commission of Inquiry           Canada Health and Social              $18.9 billion
on the Blood System in Canada.” Krever wrote: “Public             Transfer increases
health departments in many parts of Canada do not have
sufficient resources to carry out their duties…Continued          Medical Equipment Fund                $1.0 billion
chronic under-funding of public health departments is a
                                                                  Health information technology         $0.5 billion
disservice to the Canadian public…It is recommended
that the provincial and territorial ministers of health           Health Transition Fund for            $0.8 billion
provide sufficient resources for public health services.”11       Primary Care
Krever made specific reference to the need for better
surveillance for infectious diseases, not least those that        Early childhood development           $2.2 billion
had contaminated the blood supply.
                                                                  Total                                 $23.4 billion
On September 11, 2000, the provincial premiers and
federal government reached an agreement on new funding          From a national perspective, the Commission on the Future
for health care. This agreement provided $23.4 billion in       of Health Care in Canada14, under the direction of the
additional funds over a six-year period (from 2000-01 to        Hon. Mr. Roy Romanow was asked to “recommend policies”
2005-06) as set out in Table 2. There was no earmarked          that would strike “an appropriate balance between
funding for public health infrastructure, although funds        investments in prevention and health maintenance and
from the Canada Health and Social Transfer [CHST]               those directed to care and treatment.” The Romanow
could, of course, be directed to public health by the           report devotes one chapter to primary care and preven-
provinces.                                                      tion. His definition of primary care (“services … provided
                                                                not only to individuals but also to communities as a
At the provincial level, recent reports have begun to           whole, including public health programs that deal with
highlight the need for specific investments in public           epidemics, improve water or air quality, or health
health. For example, in June 2000, the Quebec govern-           promotion programs designed to reduce risks related to




                                                                                                                                C a n a d a
ment created the Commission d’étude sur les services de         tobacco, alcohol and substance abuse”) conflates general
santé et les services sociaux. The Quebec report defines        practice with traditional public health activities.
the health system broadly, encompassing services to
individuals, public programs aimed at prevention, and           Three of Mr. Romanow’s recommendations deal
social policies aimed at improving health and welfare.12        specifically with public health issues. He recommends a




                                                                                                                                i n
Of 36 recommendations, the first is “That prevention be         national immunization strategy, a physical activity strategy,
the central element of a Quebec health and welfare              and strengthening health promotion and prevention
policy.” The report explicitly integrates recommendations


                                                                                                                                H e a l t h
                                                                programs, focusing initially on obesity and tobacco use.
about public health and preventive services with those          Funding for these initiatives would come from a Primary
focused on personal health and social services. Healthier       Health Care Transfer. The proposed Health Council of
Together: A Strategic Health Plan for Newfoundland and          Canada is to monitor these activities, establish common
Labrador was released in September 2002 and focuses             indicators, and set benchmarks. Mr. Romanow also
extensively on a population approach to health.13 The           recommends that the federal government take a more
                                                                                                                                P u b l i c



report outlines only three broad goals. The first is a          active role in international health, focusing on public
wellness strategy, the second goal a healthy communities        health initiatives and the training of health care
strategy, and the third “to improve the quality, accessi-       providers in developing countries.
bility, and sustainability of health and community services.”
Throughout the report, there are many references to
                                                                                                                                o f




health promotion, health protection, illness and injury
prevention, child and youth initiatives, and the non-
                                                                                                                                R e n e w a l




medical determinants of health. Five-year targets are
listed in an appendix.


..........................................................................................                                53
                  .................................................................................................

                  One senior public health leader later commented:               The Senate Committee’s recommendations have yet to be
                                                                                 operationalized, notwithstanding another major re-
                       “Sadly, the long-awaited Romanow Report did not           investment in health services by the federal government.
                       entirely grapple with—or indeed even mention—the          Specifically, on February 5, 2003, the First Ministers and
                       serious plight of public health services in Canada.       the federal government reached another agreement on
                       Instead, it offered some suggestions for investments      incremental funding for health care. This agreement
                       in disease prevention and health promotion, such          provided for $34.8 billion in additional funds for health
                       as the creation of a central fund for harmonized          over a five-year period (2003-4 to 2007-8). Of these,
                       immunization programs and a Centre for Health             $30.9 billion represent new spending over and above the
                       Innovation focusing on ‘Health Promotion’. Much           previous Health Accord. The funding has been directed
                       of the report did not sufficiently differentiate the      as shown in Table 3 below.
                       complementary roles of primary care and public
                       health in achieving disease prevention and health
                       promotion goals. As a result, it gives the impression       T   A B L E          3
                       that all such activities—even health protection from
                                                                                   Health care funding over five years
                       hazardous exposure, and the sort of community-
                                                                                   (beginning in 2003-04), as per the 2003 Health Accord
                       based cultural change that we need to tackle the
                       obesity epidemic—can be spearheaded from physicians’        Area of funding                      Amount
                       offices and ambulatory care centres.”15
                                                                                   Canada Health and Social             $12 billion
                  The Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science         Transfer increases
                  and Technology chaired by Senator Michael Kirby released
                  The Health of Canadians –The Federal Role in October 2002        Health Reform Fund                   $16 billion
                  after a two-year study of the Canadian health care system.16
                                                                                   Diagnostic/medical equipment         $1.5 billion
                  A chapter is devoted to the argument that healthy public
                  policy must include health and wellness promotion,               Health information technology        $600 million
                  illness and injury prevention, public health and health
                  protection, and population health strategies, and that the       Research hospitals                   $500 million
                  federal government can and should play a leadership role
                  in these areas. Kirby et al focus on two areas of public         Direct Health Accord initiatives     $1.585 billion
                  health. The first is a National Chronic Disease Prevention
                                                                                   Other health reform initiatives      $1.364 billion
                  Strategy that incorporates public education efforts, mass
                  media programs, and policy interventions targeting               First Nations and Inuit Health       $1.25 billion
                  lifestyle behaviours such as a poor diet, lack of exercise,
                  smoking, excessive alcohol intake, and stress. Kirby et al       Total                                $34.8 billion
                  suggest that the federal government should commit
                  $125 million annually towards chronic disease prevention.
                  The second area of focus is the deficiency in public           The text of the 2003 Health Accord mentions “prevention”
                  health infrastructure. The Senate Committee specifically       once. In a paragraph entitled “Healthy Canadians”, the
                  cited inconsistent funding, fragmentation and poor             Accord acknowledges that there is a “collective responsi-
                  coordination between jurisdictions, and an overall lack of     bility” to deal with issues like exercise and obesity and to
                  accountability and leadership. Regarding health promo-         promote better public and environmental health.17 The
                  tion efforts, Kirby et al mention poor coordination between    2003 Accord directs health ministers to continue working
                  government and non-governmental organizations and              on initiatives to reduce health status disparities, and to
S A R S




                  low funding relative to spending on health care. The           pursue a National Immunization Strategy. Funding for
                  Committee accordingly recommended additional funding           these activities appears to come from the “direct Health
                  of $200 million annually to sustain, better coordinate,        Accord initiatives” and “other health reform initiatives”
                  and integrate the public health infrastructure as well as      line items. Other programs within these line items
f r o m




                  relevant health promotion efforts.                             include patient safety, health human resources, and
                                                                                 technology assessment.
L e a r n i n g




                  54        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

The Accord proposes that health ministers develop a set         3D.1 National Spending on Public Health
of performance indicators by September 2003, and
suggests indicators for the ministers to consider. These        For a view of federal data, Health Canada’s “Budget
indicators are divided into four groups: timely access,         Quick Facts” document does list expenditures by branch
quality, sustainability, and health status and wellness.        and business line. Various branches also provided
Although two of the suggested wellness indicators deal          internal estimates of expenditures on communicable
with obesity and physical activity, public health activities    diseases. Expenditures for infectious diseases inside PPHB
are generally overlooked. For example, none of the              were calculated from budgets for individual centres.
suggested indicators discuss vaccination rates, surveillance
of communicable diseases, disease screening, breastfeeding      For provinces and territories, we were able to obtain
rates, or childhood nutrition. The 2003 federal Budget          information on public health budgets from a few
provides $45 million over five years for the National           provinces and prorated these expenditure data to the
Immunization Strategy and a further $45 million for             entire country. Thus, the national estimates provided
“Wellness-Sport Participation”.                                 here are fairly crude approximations. Data were not
                                                                available for all subcategories. Data for vaccine costs
The record of the last several decades is depressingly clear.   were taken from a survey of provinces and territories
Even the presence of a major new infectious disease such        undertaken by Health Canada last year; costs for that
as HIV was insufficient to galvanize new investments in         year were unusually high as a result of a mass campaign
and reorganization of public health infrastructure in           of meningococcal vaccination in Quebec.
Canada. Notwithstanding the drumbeat of disease preven-
tion and health promotion, governments have steadily            Expenditures were estimated for both a narrow definition
committed virtually all new health spending to areas            of public health (roughly corresponding to the activities
other than public health. We turn accordingly to a brief        of official P/T and local public health organizations)
examination of the funding of public health in Canada.          and a broader definition (including activities of non-
                                                                governmental organizations [NGOs] and regulatory
                                                                functions).
3D. Funding Public Health
    in Canada                                                   Table 4 provides a summary of estimated public health
                                                                expenditures in Canada. Total public health expendi-
Tellingly, reliable information on expenditures on public       tures in Canada (2002 - 2003) are estimated at $2.8 billion
health in Canada is not even readily available. The data        by the broad definition, and $2 billion by the narrow
published by the Canadian Institute for Health Information      definition. This corresponds to per capita expenditures




                                                                                                                               C a n a d a
[CIHI] are not suitably disaggregated and therefore             of $88 and $65, respectively. CIHI has forecasted 2002
unhelpful. The public health category includes admin-           health expenditures of $79.4 billion for the public sector
istrative spending for many other parts of the health care      alone and $112.2 billion for the public and private
system. For example, the amount shown for Ontario               sectors combined. Public health by the broader and
includes the province’s contribution to the Canadian            narrower definitions therefore amounts to 2.5% and
Blood Services and the operating costs of the provincial        1.8% respectively of total health expenditures (public




                                                                                                                               i n
breast cancer screening program. Some other provinces           and private) or 3.5% and 2.6% respectively of publicly-
provide no breakdown at all. CIHI intends to publish            funded expenditures. Public health expenditures for


                                                                                                                               H e a l t h
public health expenditures data separate from general           infectious diseases specifically, are estimated at $787
administrative costs of government ministries, but this         million or $25 per capita. This corresponds to 1.0% of
will not solve the problem of inconsistencies in categories     public health care expenditures.
of expenditure included in the public health envelope.
                                                                3D.2 Expenditure Trends in Ontario
                                                                                                                               P u b l i c




                                                                We attempted to examine public health system funding
                                                                trends in more detail for the Province of Ontario. Our
                                                                interest was piqued by the fact that Ontario has a set of
                                                                mandatory programs for local public health units and
                                                                                                                               o f




                                                                measures compliance with them. The programs represent
                                                                a solid foundation for public health, and thus the relation-
                                                                ship between program compliance and funding seemed
                                                                                                                               R e n e w a l




                                                                to offer a potential benchmark for analysis.



..........................................................................................                               55
                  .................................................................................................


                   T   A B L E             4
                   Summary of Estimated Public Health Expenditures - Federal and Provincial/Territorial Departments of Health, 2002.

                                                     Total Expenditures             Per Capita                         As Proportion of Health
                                                         ($ million)              Expenditures $                         Care Expenditures

                                                                                                               Total                           Publicly-funded

                   Broad definition                         2,762.4                      88                    2.5%                                  3.5%

                   Narrow definition                        2,047.0                      65                    1.8%                                  2.6%




                   T   A B L E             5
                   Breakdown of Estimated Public Health Expenditures by Federal and Provincial Departments of Health in Canada, 2002*
                   ($ millions)
                                                                   Direct                Grants & Contributions                   Total                  Total
                                                                  Spending               for Community-based                     Broad                 Narrow
                                                                                              Interventions                   definition1,4           definition2

                   Federal [Health Canada] only]
                      PPHB                                          186.8                          200.3                          387.5                 225.04
                      Other Branches                                497.93                                                        497.9                 75.05
                      Vaccines                                       25.3                                                          25.3                  25.3
                      Subtotal                                      710.0                          200.3                          910.7                 325.3

                   P/T
                      Ontario                                       443.76                            -                          528.310                443.76
                      B.C.                                          234.87                            -                          246.59                 234.87
                      Nova Scotia                                    28.48                            -                           29.89                  28.4
                      Manitoba                                       43.08                            -                            459                   43.0
                      Prorated to Rest of Canada11                  622.8                                                         653.3                 622.8
                      Vaccines                                        349                                                          349                   349
                      Subtotal                                      1721.7                                                       1851.9                 1721.7

                   Total                                            2431.7                         200.3                         2762.6                  2047

                   Notes:
                   1 Local public health plus regulatory functions and grants and contributions for community-based interventions
                   2 Functions corresponding to work done by local official public health agencies
                   3 Healthy Environments and Consumer Safety Branch [HECS], Health Products and Food Branch [HPFB], Pest Management Regulatory Agency
                      [PMRA], expenditures for the ‘protection & promotion of health’ business line, plus the public health portion of First Nations and Inuit Health
                      Branch [FNIHB] expenditures
                   4 Direct spending + estimated portion of grants and contributions
                   5 Estimated public health-like expenditures by FNIHB
S A R S




                   6 includes municipal portion + provincial public health branch
                   7 BC CDC plus Ministry and transfers to regions minus public health labs and vaccines
                   8 Ministry plus transfers to regions (Nova Scotia: +10% for food safety and related health inspection services)
                   9 Estimate - approximately 5% allowance for health promotion grants and regulatory work
                   10 Addition of health promotion transfer grants + Healthy Babies, Healthy Children Program
f r o m




                   11 Prorated on a per capita cost basis by region: Manitoba for Alberta and Saskatchewan, Nova Scotia for Maritime provinces and territories,
                      British Columbia for Quebec.
                   * Best available data as of May 2003.
L e a r n i n g




                  56        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

                                                                                                                                                                        Funding trend data do not address
 F                                I G U R E            1                                                                                                                the broader issue of whether current
                                                                                                                                                                        funding is sufficient to fulfill the
 Local Public Health Funding in Ontario —- Percentage of
                                                                                                                                                                        mandate of the public health system.
 Ministry of Health Spending and Per Capita Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                        As noted, Ontario’s Mandatory Health
                                  1.75                                                                                40
                                                                                                                                                                        Programs and Services offered a
                                                                                                                                                                        potential benchmark. The Program




                                                                                                                           Per capita public health funding (dollars)
                                  1.70                                                                                35
                                                                                                                                                                        standards and requirements are
  % Ministry of Health Spending




                                                                                                                      30
                                                                                                                                                                        reasonably detailed and have a
                                  1.65
                                                                                                                                                                        strong service delivery perspective.
                                                                                                                      25                                                Starting in 1998, the Public Health
                                  1.60                                                                                                                                  Branch developed a series of
                                                                                                                      20                                                indicators to facilitate local health
                                  1.55                                                                                                                                  departments’ reporting on the
                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                                                                                        extent of compliance with the
                                  1.50                                                                                                                                  Mandatory Programs. The Public
                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                                        Health Branch annually compiles
                                  1.45
                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                                        information from a Mandatory
                                                                                                                                                                        Program Indicator Questionnaire
                                  1.40                                                                                 0                                                [MPIQ]. Provincial averages for
                                         1994   1995       1996   1997       1998   1999     2000       2001   2002                                                     overall compliance as evidenced by
                                                   % of Ministry of Health                 Per Capita                                                                   MPIQ results are reported to have
                                                                                                                                                                        increased from 70.9% to 82.6%
 Local public health funding is based on provincial and municipal contributions to public health
 departments in Ontario. The provincial component coincides primarily with the “Official Local                                                                          from the period of 1998 to 2001.
 Health Agencies” line item in Public Accounts. Data are missing for 1997 due to the time-limited                                                                       The extent to which the additional
 downloading policy of the provincial government.
                                                                                                                                                                        funding is responsible for rising
                                                                                                                                                                        compliance is unclear.
Unfortunately, examining funding trends for the public
health system in Ontario was problematic for several reasons.
Substantial funding by municipalities is not captured by
                                                                                                          3D.3 A Modest Investment by Any Measure
provincial public accounts or estimates. In the transition                                                CIHI data report that public health and administration
to the current 50:50 cost sharing with municipalities, there                                              together account for 6% of health care spending. The




                                                                                                                                                                                                                C a n a d a
was a brief period of 100% funding of local programming                                                   investment in public health is clearly the smaller part of
by municipalities. The province has also introduced a                                                     that percentage. Convergent validation of the estimates
large and expanding Healthy Babies, Healthy Children                                                      developed above is derived from Alberta data. As noted
Program. Further, non-public health budget lines appear                                                   earlier, Alberta’s regional health authorities [RHAs] are
to be embedded in the public health vote.                                                                 responsible for the delivery of both acute and chronic
                                                                                                          care, as well as public health programs. In 1999-2000,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                i n
The Ontario Association of Local Health Agencies (alPHa)                                                  RHA spending on “promotion, prevention, and protection”
has tried to track funding for local public health depart-                                                accounted for 2.9% of their budgets. This number is


                                                                                                                                                                                                                H e a l t h
ments. Data were available for selected years from 1994-                                                  consistent with our estimates that public health spending
2002. These figures combine provincial and municipal                                                      amounts to approximately 2% of total health spending.
funding of local public health departments. Figure 1 above                                                These estimates are also in a range familiar to public
suggests that local public health funding lagged the growth                                               health practitioners, i.e., between 1.5% and 3% of health
in overall provincial health care spending during the period                                              spending. Only by using the broader definition of public
                                                                                                                                                                                                                P u b l i c


of 1996-2001. Funding as a percentage of total health                                                     health and the smaller denominator of public spending
spending increased in 2002, but remains below levels                                                      alone does the figure move slightly outside that range to
observed in 1994 and 1995. Per capita spending, unadjusted                                                3.5%. The good news is that, because public health
for inflation, has clearly increased from 1998 through                                                    remains a very small part of total health spending, relatively
2002. The total public health budget net of revenue and                                                   modest investments could have a transformative impact.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                o f




excluded items plus unorganized areas ($3.3 million) was                                                  The bad news is that there are clearly inconsistencies in
$304.4 million in 1998 and $435.9 million in 2002. Per                                                    public health programming and spending within and
capita spending appears similar to Manitoba but lower
                                                                                                                                                                                                                R e n e w a l




                                                                                                          between provinces and territories, with the result that
than British Columbia; however, interprovincial comparisons                                               uniform conditional transfers by the federal government
must be drawn cautiously given limitations of the data.                                                   to reinforce capacity will be difficult to operationalize.

..........................................................................................                                                                                                                57
                  .................................................................................................

                  Overall spending targets are difficult to set as there are       3E.1 United States of America
                  limited data on spending trends and outputs, let alone
                  health status outcomes. The Ontario data are consistent          The USA combines a large population (297 million), the
                  with the common opinion that absolute levels of public           highest average per capita income on the globe, dramatic
                  health funding have generally increased, but lagged              income-related and ethno-racial health status disparities,
                  behind spending on health care in general. This latter           geographic challenges that are only slightly less daunting
                  point has been supported in a submission to the Committee        than those in Canada, and a federal system of govern-
                  by the Canadian Medical Association. Comparisons of              ment that includes 57 separate governments at the
                  expenditures across jurisdictions are also difficult, as no      state/territorial/district level.
                  two provinces seem to include exactly the same activities
                  within the public health funding envelope. For example,          The Institute of Medicine has recently published a compre-
                  in several western provinces, most or all of immunization,       hensive and critical review of public health infrastructure
                  including vaccine and delivery costs, is provided through        in the United States.18 As the Institute’s report high-
                  public health, whereas in Ontario and Quebec most immu-          lights, the health care context is different from other
                  nizations are given in physicians’ offices and delivery is       developed countries: the Department of Health and
                  funded through the medical insurance plan.                       Human Services, through its Medicare and Medicaid
                                                                                   programs (the latter a joint venture with the states) is the
                  If one takes British Columbia as a benchmark, and                largest insurer in the country. However, absent universal
                  calculates the incremental funding required to bring all         health care insurance, the majority of Americans obtain
                  provinces up to the per capita spending apparent for             insurance privately, with about 40 million uninsured,
                  British Columbia, governments would need to spend an             relying on a patchwork of state, local and voluntary
                  additional $408 million per annum. But this figure is            programs for service. This tends to confuse the public
                  imprecise. Some services included in the British Columbia        health picture, as public health programs at the state and
                  public health envelope may be funded through different           municipal level are often an amalgam of population
                  envelopes in other provinces, and we have no way of              health and clinical prevention programs and curative
                  being certain that British Columbia’s spending in any            care for the indigent and uninsured populations.
                  way represents a ‘gold standard’ for public health. The
                  incremental spending proposed does not consider the              The US constitution gives states primary responsibility
                  potential differences in delivery costs due to geographically-   for health. The federal government has a limited role in
                  dispersed populations, variable proportions of higher            the direct delivery of public health services, but does
                  needs populations, or fixed system costs that are partly         provide leadership, has some regulatory authority, and
                  independent of population size. We turn therefore to             contributes operational and financial resources. The
                  international comparisons for additional enlightenment.          ultimate authority for public health in the USA rests with
                                                                                   the Secretary of Health and Human Services. The Assistant
                                                                                   Secretary for Health is the principal advisor to the
                  3E. International Comparisons                                    Secretary on public health and related scientific issues.
                                                                                   Presently, the Acting Assistant Secretary is Dr. Richard
                  For comparative purposes, the Committee asked Health
                                                                                   Carmona, who is also the Surgeon General. There is also
                  Canada to obtain information on the organization,
                                                                                   an Assistant Secretary for Public Health Emergency
                  governance and funding of public health in selected
                                                                                   Preparedness.
                  foreign countries, with an emphasis on national agencies.
                  We have reviewed material on the USA, the United
                                                                                   The lead agency for public health activity at the federal
                  Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Sweden, Finland, and
                                                                                   level is the US Department of Health and Human
                  Norway. We found the organization and governance of
                                                                                   Services [DHHS] (see Appendix 3.1 for an organizational
S A R S




                  public health to be particularly informative for the USA,
                                                                                   chart). The DHHS oversees several key agencies including
                  United Kingdom, and Australia, and review these below.
                                                                                   the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC],
                                                                                   referenced in the two previous chapters. Numerous
                                                                                   committees in both the House of Representatives and
f r o m




                                                                                   Senate have jurisdiction over HHS activity. The roles of
                                                                                   DHHS include:
L e a r n i n g




                  58        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

Policy making: For example, the DHHS, through its               state and local levels. Other relevant legislation governs
Healthy People initiative, sets goals and objectives for        immunization and vaccine purchase, and includes several
health promotion and disease prevention.                        long-standing “categorical” programs to fund specific
                                                                nationwide programs, usually with an emphasis on the
Financing public health activities: Whereas much of             poor or on children and youth, often in partnership with
the CDC budget flows through to the states and territories,     states.
the Institute of Medicine [IOM] notes that other spending
by DHHS in the public health sphere goes not to public          Apart from the CDC, other agencies under the umbrella
health activities as we understand them, but to personal        of the DHHS in the USA are listed below. The list shows
health care services through Medicaid.                          their 2002 HHS budget authority in parentheses; these
                                                                agencies may receive additional funding from non-HHS
Public health protection: The federal government is             sources:
heavily involved in this area through the Food and Drug
Administration [FDA], and the Centers for Medicare and          • Food and Drug Administration (US$1.3 billion)
Medicaid Services which regulates health care providers
                                                                • Health Resources & Services Administration
and laboratories.
                                                                  (US$6.2 billion)
Collecting and disseminating information:                       • Indian Health Service (US$2.9 billion)
Numerous federal agencies collect key health data.
                                                                • National Institutes of Health (US$23.6 billion)
Capacity building for population health: The federal            • Substance Abuse & Mental Health Services
government is expected to ensure that state and local             (US$3.1 billion)
governments have the resources (human, financial,
                                                                • Agency for Healthcare Research & Quality
organizational, etc.) to carry out their responsibilities. In
                                                                  (US$0.3 billion)
practice, state public health agencies are chronically
under-funded. When states do receive additional funds           • Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
from the federal government, they sometimes use these             (US$388 billion)
resources to reduce the proportion of state expenses
                                                                • Administration for Children & Families
directed towards public health activities, i.e., the funds
                                                                  (US$47.3 billion)
substitute for, rather than increase, existing state-level
public health spending.                                         • Administration on Aging (US$1.3 billion)




                                                                                                                             C a n a d a
Direct management of services: These allocations                The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC]
include Medicaid, Medicare, funding of the Indian               was founded in 1946 to combat malaria, typhus and
Health Service, and some community health centres.              other communicable diseases. As noted in Chapter 1,
                                                                CDC initially stood for “Communicable Disease Center.”
Faced with a constitutional division of powers similar to       The CDC was renamed the Center for Disease Control in




                                                                                                                             i n
that in Canada, the DHHS must work with State, Local            1970, and added “Prevention” to its name (but not the
and Tribal governments to fulfill its mission of protecting     acronym) in 1992. It is an operating division of the
the health of all Americans. The US Public Health               Department of Health and Human Services, and the


                                                                                                                             H e a l t h
Service [PHS] combines eight HHS agencies with the              largest federal agency outside Washington, D.C. The
Office of Public Health and Science [OPHS] that houses          CDC has always been based in Atlanta, but over 2,000 of
the Office of the Surgeon General. The Surgeon General          the approximately 8,600 full-time equivalent employees
directs the PHS Commissioned Corps—a quasi-military             work elsewhere; this includes postings in 47 state health
unit of 6,000 uniformed public health professionals.            departments, with 120 CDC employees overseas. Some
                                                                                                                             P u b l i c



                                                                CDC staff are also members of the Commissioned Corps
The federal government has constitutional responsibility        of the PHS. The CDC’s current mission is “to promote
for preventing entry of disease into the USA and, under         health and quality of life by preventing and controlling
the Interstate Commerce clause of the Constitution, for         disease, injury, and disability.” The federal government
preventing the interstate spread of disease. The USA            created the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
                                                                                                                             o f




has specific legislation (the Public Health Threats and         Registry [ATSDR] in 1980. The director of the CDC also
Emergencies Act, 2000, also known as the Frist/Kennedy          serves as the administrator of the ATSDR; the CDC and
                                                                                                                             R e n e w a l




Act) aimed at countering bioterrorism through the               the ATSDR submit a joint budget request.
improvement of public health infra- and infostructure at


..........................................................................................                             59
                  .................................................................................................

                  The CDC has 12 centres, institutes and offices. The           The Public Health Workforce Development
                  Director is always a public health physician and the          Initiative includes a comprehensive strategy for life-long
                  senior staff are predominantly health professionals and       learning for public health practitioners, and has two
                  scientists. The CDC maintains a very high public profile,     arms: the Public Health Training Network and the
                  and has a strong ‘corporate brand’. Its director reports to   National Laboratory Training Network.
                  the Secretary for Health and Human Services through the
                  Deputy Secretary.                                             The National Public Health Laboratory System,
                                                                                beginning with standardization and enhanced testing,
                  The CDC exerts considerable influence at state and            aims to develop policies and public-private partnerships
                  local levels. In part this is due to the CDC’s Epidemic       that would enable improved and more timely reporting
                  Intelligence Service [EIS]. The EIS was a forerunner of       of laboratory results.
                  similar programs in Canada and elsewhere. The EIS is
                  at once a training program in field epidemiology,             The Public Health Information Network is the
                  surveillance and disease control, and a significant part      architecture for a comprehensive system for the capture
                  of the CDC’s ability to respond rapidly to outbreaks          and exchange of surveillance information. It provides
                  anywhere in the USA or abroad. It helps to ensure that        desktop access to important information for public
                  the CDC can dispatch teams to assist or lead local            health practitioners.
                  investigations into disease outbreaks.
                                                                                The Public Health Emergency Fund is available for
                  Many of the state and local staff were trained in the         federal action on public health emergencies.
                  CDC EIS. Most states also have CDC staff stationed in
                  key state agencies.                                           The situation with surveillance in the USA is not dissimilar
                                                                                to Canada with respect to legal authority. Mandatory
                  The CDC is the clear international leader in the areas of     reporting of infectious diseases occurs at the state or even
                  surveillance systems, databases, outbreak investigation,      local level in the USA. Although the CDC and the
                  and communicable disease epidemiology. The speed              Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists jointly
                  with which the CDC and the PHS Corps can respond to           maintain a list of nationally notifiable infectious diseases,
                  an emergency infectious outbreak is unmatched globally.       reporting to the CDC is voluntary. On the other hand,
                                                                                the CDC performs a crucial role in disease surveillance,
                  The programs of the CDC are directed towards two major        offering leadership and coordination, education, laboratory
                  functions. It provides infrastructure support to the states   testing, and information technology, as well as direct
                  and local health agencies. It also serves as the national     funding. In the last category, for example, the National
                  command centre for health emergencies, including              Center for Infectious Diseases distributed US$31.2 million
                  new or re-emerging infectious diseases and bioterrorism.      to states in 1998 through various grants for surveillance.
                  The CDC engages in research, offers technical advice to       Other CDC departments also provide funding to states
                  multiple nations, and helps with program development          for surveillance. In 2002, bioterrorism funding enabled
                  in the USA and around the world.                              the CDC to disburse almost US$1 billion to states, of
                                                                                which approximately US$183 million was for surveillance
                  The infrastructure programs are set out below:                and epidemiology. In short, given constitutional limits
                                                                                and recent legislation that prevents the imposition of
                  The National Public Health Standards Program                  unfunded mandates on states by federal regulators, the
                  develops capacity and performance standards, provides         CDC essentially purchases a national surveillance system
                  for evaluation against these standards and provides           through earmarked state-level funding and partnerships.
                  grants and technical assistance to state and local health
S A R S




                  authorities to address deficiencies. Although states are      In the USA, the Healthy People 2010 Objectives (published
                  free to reject the CDC’s performance standards, the           every ten years) contain quantifiable objectives, and
                  CDC’s funding of state-level programs gives it substantial    progress towards them is measured. This stands in
                  influence.                                                    contrast to Canada, where an overarching public health
f r o m




                                                                                strategy for the nation has never been articulated.
                  The Health Alert Network links all state and local
                  health departments to secure communication systems
                  through the development of architecture, technical
L e a r n i n g




                  assistance and grant-supported projects.




                  60        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

Essential public health services have been defined. The
CDC offers programs and funding to review state/local           T   A B L E          6
performance; a framework for organizing, assessing and
                                                                Budget for the Centers for Disease Control and
developing public health staff care competencies; and a
                                                                Prevention, USA, 2002 (US$).
potential framework for new/revised public health
legislation. Again, the contrast to Canada is striking.         Program                               Expenditure   Percent
Direct transfers to P/T governments earmarked for public                                               (US$, 000)
health do not occur in this nation, leading to inter-           Birth Defects and Disabilities           $89,946      1.4%
jurisdictional inconsistencies along with limited national
                                                                Chronic Disease Prevention
coordination. The federal presence in public health is
                                                                and Health Promotion                   $746,731     11.4%
also much reduced.                                                 Heart Disease and Stroke             $37,378
                                                                   Diabetes                             $61,683
The enacted CDC budget for the 2002 fiscal year (FY 2002)          Cancer                              $268,627
is outlined in the CDC’s budget request for FY 2004.               Arthritis and Other Chronic Diseases $20,812
Allocations for 2003 had not been formally enacted at              Tobacco                             $100,973
the time of the 2004 budget request; nevertheless, as              Nutrition, Physical Activity,
2004 requests are generally similar both in total and by             and Obesity                        $27,505
category to actual 2002 and expected 2003 enactments,              Health Promotion                     $15,235
this report presents data for 2002 only.                           School Health                        $58,443
                                                                   Safe Motherhood/Infant Health        $50,697
                                                                   Oral Health                          $10,814
The CDC’s total 2002 budget of approximately
                                                                   Prevention Centers                   $26,176
US$6.5 billion excludes approximately US$1.2 billion               Youth Media Campaign                 $68,388
transferred from the CDC’s terrorism budget to the
                                                                Environmental Health                   $153,397       2.3%
Department of Homeland Security for accumulation of a
“strategic national stockpile” and the smallpox vaccination     Epidemic Services and Response           $80,156      1.2%
program. The CDC receives funding via several mecha-            Health Statistics                       $126,750      1.9%
nisms (e.g., the Labor-Health and Human Services-               HIV/AIDS, STD and TB Prevention       $1,156,826    17.6%
Education regular appropriations bill, the Veteran Affairs-        HIV/AIDS – Domestic                  $689,169
Housing and Urban Development regular appropriations               HIV/AIDS – International             $168,720
bill, the Public Health and Social Services Emergency              STDs                                 $166,534
Fund, etc.). Budget details are presented by program in            TB                                   $132,403
Table 6.                                                        Immunizations




                                                                                                                               C a n a d a
                                                                (state programs, public health clinics) $627,239      9.6%
Although responsibility for public health rests with the        Infectious Disease Control             $348,181       5.3%
states constitutionally, the degree of commitment to public     Injury Prevention and Control           $149,502      2.3%
health by states and territories varies greatly. A few states   Occupational Safety and Health         $275,808       4.2%
invest heavily, and others hardly at all. State health
                                                                Preventive Health and Health




                                                                                                                               i n
departments are usually headed by a professionally-             Services Block Grant                   $134,958       2.1%
qualified director or commissioner. However, this official
                                                                Public Health Improvement               $148,306      2.3%
may have responsibility not only for public health, but


                                                                                                                               H e a l t h
also for Medicaid, professional licensing and other health      Emergency Response and Recovery          $12,000      0.2%
care matters, and perhaps child welfare and some social         Office of the Director                   $49,077      0.7%
services as well. In the interests of brevity, we shall not     Buildings and Facilities                $296,000      4.5%
review state-specific arrangements in detail here. Suffice      ATSDR                                    $78,203      1.2%
it to say that the provision of local and regional public
                                                                                                                               P u b l i c


                                                                Terrorism (Nonbuildings
health services appears more variable in the US than in         and Facilities)                   $1,101,439        16.8%
Canada. While some larger cities have very effective               Upgrading State and Local Capacity $940,174
public health units, there are also several thousand local         Upgrading CDC Capacity             $143,225
(usually county-based) agencies, many too small to be              Anthrax                             $18,040
effective or attract qualified staff. Resources are             Vaccines for Children
                                                                                                                               o f




constrained by local ratepayer interest, as a substantial       (Medicaid, uninsured, native, etc.)    $989,535     15.1%
portion of the funding for local agencies comes from            User Fees                                 $2,226      0.0%
                                                                                                                               R e n e w a l




municipal or country-level taxes and revenues.
                                                                Total                                 $6,566,280    100.0%



..........................................................................................                                61
                  .................................................................................................

                  The first line for outbreak management remains at the            be investigated accordingly in tandem with clinical
                  local and then state level in the USA. The CDC must be           governance. Each region has its own characteristics and
                  invited to offer support, but thereafter it plays particularly   public health priorities.
                  strong roles in outbreak investigation and strategic
                  advice. The CDC’s influence and surveillance systems             Intriguingly, the Cabinet includes not only a Minister of
                  also ensure that, with few exceptions, it enters the fray        Health but a Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for
                  early in any serious outbreak. Just as in Canada, juris-         Public Health, essentially a junior minister, with specific
                  dictional tensions occur. However, the conspicuous               responsibilities for a strategy to improve the health of the
                  position of the CDC in US outbreaks arises from its own          public and for policies on issues such as tobacco control
                  firepower, its funding of activities by other governmental       and food safety. The government published a green
                  jurisdictions, the role that it plays in training and            paper and subsequent white paper (Saving Lives: Our
                  capacity-building, direct secondments of federal                 Healthier Nation) setting out the government’s strategy
                  personnel into state/territorial agencies, and, not least,       for public health policy. In contrast to the Canadian
                  limits in capacity at the local or regional level.               situation, the white paper identified five priority areas
                                                                                   for reducing mortality and morbidity and 25 quantified
                  3E.2 United Kingdom                                              targets for achieving reductions in mortality and morbidity
                                                                                   over given timescales. Work in progress is addressing
                  Although the United Kingdom does not have a federal              targets for addressing health inequalities and tackling
                  constitution, three separate health systems are in               some of the social and environmental determinants of
                  operation for England and Wales, Scotland, and Northern          health. Public health activities are subject to national
                  Ireland. Each is a variation on the basic model of the           health frameworks: each Strategic Health Authority
                  National Health Service [NHS].                                   measures the performance of the primary care trusts within
                                                                                   its boundaries, and the performance of Strategic Health
                  Britain was a pioneer in many aspects of public health           Authorities in turn is assessed centrally. In sum, Britain
                  during the nineteenth century. Its strong municipally-           is making an effort to create an accountable hierarchy of
                  based public health programs were largely absorbed into          performance measurement in public health, a structure
                  the NHS when the latter was created in 1948. Since then,         parallel to its innovative system of performance measure-
                  public health has been closely integrated with other NHS         ment for clinical or personal health services.
                  functions. Furthermore, public health physicians in the
                  United Kingdom have wide-ranging roles. They are not             The UK government recently formed a Health Protection
                  only engaged in public health as we understand it, but           Agency. It drew together the Public Health Laboratory
                  also in planning, commissioning and managing the                 Service (including the Communicable Disease Surveillance
                  quality of the NHS clinical services.                            Centre), the Centre for Applied Microbiology and
                                                                                   Research, NHS staff responsible for communicable disease
                  The basic organizational unit of the NHS is the Primary          control and emergency planning, and units responsible
                  Care Trust. Many public health services are provided at          for chemical exposures and poison control. The staff in
                  this level. Since April 2002, the trusts are accountable         this agency number 2,700 in 9 regional offices. This
                  to 28 Strategic Health Authorities, each with a regional         second line of defence against outbreaks is an important
                  director of public health. The public health directors in        innovation to which we shall return.
                  the Strategic Health Authorities are charged with the
                  development of a cross-governmental and cross-sectoral           The government operates other agencies designed to
                  approach to the determinants of health. Public health            drive a research agenda in public health and translate
                  policy informs and is informed by regional work on               evidence into action. The Health Development Agency has
                  economic regeneration, education, employment and                 an annual budget of about C$23 million. Focused on
S A R S




                  transport. The directors give high priority to partnerships      knowledge translation, the agency finances systematic
                  with primary care physicians. They are accountable for           reviews, gathers evidence and makes it available to public
                  health protection (including control of communicable             health authorities, advises on good public health practice,
                  diseases and environmental hazards) across the region,           and supports the information needs of front-line public
f r o m




                  and play a role in emergency and disaster planning and           health workers. It has a particular interest in health
                  management. The public health directors are also often a         promotion and works closely with both local public health
                  point of contact for concerns about clinical standards.          agencies and community groups. The Department of
                  In essence, serious lapses in clinical quality are regarded      Health also funds the Policy Research Programme to help
L e a r n i n g




                  as tantamount to iatrogenic disease outbreaks, and may           ensure that public health policy, plans, and practices are
                                                                                   based on reliable evidence about population needs and



                  62        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

effective interventions. All of the research is directly        Joint public health activities conducted by the
commissioned (costing around C$67 million per annum).           Commonwealth and State/Territories Health Authorities
More generally, the Department of Health will spend             are coordinated through the National Public Health
approximately C$1.21 billion in 2002/03 through the             Partnership, a sub-committee of the Australian Health
Policy Research Programme and NHS R&D Programme.                Minister’s Conference. States and territories vary in the
While the NHS R&D Programme has a strong applied                organization of their public health services, with differing
clinical and health services focus, a meaningful                numbers of local and regional public health units,
proportion of the research spills over to inform public         variable integration with community health centres, and
health issues. The British Medical Research Council is          considerable variation in the role of NGOs or stand-alone
funded separately for investigator-initiated research           foundations.
across the full range of health research.
                                                                In February 2003, all Health Ministers signed a
3E.3 Australia                                                  memorandum of understanding to continue the National
                                                                Public Health Partnership [NPHP] for the period 2003-
Australia is similar to Canada with its vast land mass,         2007. The memorandum sets out the objectives of the
modest population (now about 19 million), and federal           NPHP, clarifies the roles and responsibilities of the
system of government. Australia’s federation is comprised       respective parties to the multilateral agreement and
of six states and two territories. The Commonwealth             describes the arrangements for implementation. The
(federal) government has a broad policy leadership and          NPHP Group is comprised of a senior representative from
financing role in health matters, while the states and          Commonwealth, State and Territory Health Departments
territories are largely responsible for the delivery of         (voting members), senior representatives of the Australian
public hospital and community services. Australia has           Institute of Health and Welfare and the National Health
moved back and forth with various configurations of             and Medical Research Council (non-voting members) and
private-public mix in financing and delivering personal         two observers (the New Zealand Ministry of Health and
health services. Currently, it operates a national              the NPHP Advisory Group). The NPHP has already
compulsory tax-based system of public health insurance          established subgroups in areas such as communicable
(known as Medicare), graduated on the basis of income           diseases and AIDS.
and general taxation, that provides access to medical and
hospital services for all Australians. The Commonwealth         The Program priorities for the NPHP are clearly identified.
has recently introduced a number of key policy initiatives      They include: 1) improving public health practice;
to increase participation in parallel private health            2) developing public health information systems;
insurance. The Commonwealth also provides manage-               3) reviewing and harmonizing public health legislation;




                                                                                                                               C a n a d a
ment and control of communicable diseases, and regulates        4) implementing public health workforce initiatives;
food, therapeutic goods, and chemicals.                         5) strengthening national public health research and
                                                                development capacity; 6) improving the coordination of
The Commonwealth Department of Health and Aged                  national public health strategies; 7) developing standards
Care coordinates surveillance, prevention, management           for the delivery of core public health strategies; and
and control of communicable diseases, and regulation of




                                                                                                                               i n
                                                                8) improving Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health.
food and therapeutic products. However, funding of              Lessons for Canada from these collaborative arrangements
public health differs from funding of hospital and              with explicit priorities are self-evident.


                                                                                                                               H e a l t h
medical services. While the Commonwealth (under the
Australia Health Care Agreements) pays 75% of total             The Commonwealth contributes towards the capacity of
funding for public hospital services, it pays for half of the   states and territories through Public Health Outcome
public health services funding (30% via direct expenditure      Funding Agreements [PHOFAs]. Base funding is provided
and 22% via payments to States and Territories). The            for major national health priorities. PHOFAs include
                                                                                                                               P u b l i c



states and territories contribute the remainder. Based on       specific outcome reporting requirements. This year, the
1999/2000 data, A$931 million was spent on core public          Commonwealth Department of Health & Welfare
health activities (less than 2% of health expenditure in        provided funds for SARS screening at airports, vaccines,
Australia).                                                     and improved prevention in primary care.
                                                                                                                               o f
                                                                                                                               R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                              63
                  .................................................................................................

                  The NPHP has made substantial efforts to integrate the          SARS has highlighted how communicable diseases,
                  preventive work of general practitioners with other primary     particular those caused by hitherto unknown agents, can
                  care services and community services. These steps should        tap primal anxieties, prompt enormous interest on the
                  help to integrate the personal service continuum with           part of the media, and provoke some unsavoury public
                  broader public health programming. In particular, the           responses (e.g., incidents of harassment and scapegoating
                  NPHP is working with the General Practice Advisory              of the Asian community in Toronto). The SARS outbreak
                  Committee to improve the adoption of preventive and             thereby underscores the need for public health to play a
                  early intervention approaches by general practitioners,         leadership role in analyzing risks and communicating
                  thereby rationalizing the complementary role of clinical        effectively about them. Yet, as the chronology in the
                  and population strategies for prevention. Research on           last chapter demonstrated, neither the analytical capacity
                  population health issues and epidemiologic study is             nor the communications strategies were anywhere
                  supported at the Commonwealth level through two                 near optimal.
                  mechanisms. The National Health and Medical Research
                  Council [NHMRC] provides independent, expert advice             Many involved have acknowledged the potential conse-
                  to government in health issues and research grants.             quences of two public health crises happening simulta-
                  As well, the Public Health Education and Research Program       neously. What if SARS had struck just as public health
                  funds Australian tertiary institutions to strengthen post-      staff were fully engaged in coping with a bioterrorism
                  graduate education and training, including preparation          attack or an accelerated caseload of infections with
                  of public health practitioners and research training in         West Nile virus? In the absence of a robust public health
                  population health.                                              system with built-in surge capacity, every crisis forces
                                                                                  trade-offs—attention to one infectious disease at the
                                                                                  expense of others, or infectious disease prevention at the
                  3F. Some Reflections and                                        expense of food safety, chronic disease prevention, and
                      Conclusions                                                 other public health responsibilities. In the latter respect,
                                                                                  if Canada expends most available public health resources
                  SARS is simply the latest in a series of recent bellwethers     on relatively rare events such as SARS or West Nile virus,
                  for the fragile state of Canada’s federal/provincial/           we run the risk of winning a few high-profile battles
                  municipal public health systems. The pattern is now             while losing the war for health. A host of partially
                  familiar. Public health is taken for granted until disease      preventable non-communicable diseases continue to
                  outbreaks occur, whereupon a brief flurry of lip service        exact a tremendous toll on the health of Canadians,
                  leads to minimal investments and little real change in          while avoidable injuries cost the nation billions of dollars
                  public health infrastructure or priorities. This cycle          in direct health spending and indirect costs. Public
                  must end.                                                       health has much to contribute apart from containment
                                                                                  of communicable diseases.
                  Canadians have seen high-profile disease clusters arising
                  from the contamination of water supplies in Walkerton,          The chronology in Chapter 2 highlighted the impact of
                  Ontario and North Battleford, Saskatchewan. Both had            SARS in Canada’s richest and largest city in the nation’s
                  tragic effects. Last year, the nation faced an outbreak of      richest and largest province. Globe and Mail columnist
                  West Nile virus. West Nile virus is another zoonosis, arising   Margaret Wente has tartly commented: “Thanks to near-
                  from a reservoir of infected birds and transmitted to           heroic efforts by public health officials, we managed to
                  humans by mosquito bites. The virus appeared in North           fight off a SARS fire spreading at lightning speed with an
                  America in New York City in 1999, and was detected in           organization about as sophisticated as an improvised
                  Canada by the summer/fall of 2001. Canada recorded              bucket brigade.”19 Support to fight the outbreak was
                  about 300 confirmed cases in 2002, some with severe or          required from other jurisdictions, including scores of
S A R S




                  fatal effects. Variant Creutzfeld Jacob Disease (the human      volunteers from the USA.
                  form of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy or BSE) has
                  also sparked public anxieties and exacted an economic toll.     The capacity of other provinces varies but Ontario is
                                                                                  assuredly not the ‘weakest link’ in the P/T public health
f r o m




                  The SARS outbreak was moderate in size, in part because         chain. In this respect, an F/P/T report on Public Health
                  effective actions were taken to contain its spread and also     Capacity was prepared for the Conference of Deputy
                  because the causative agent is actually less contagious         Ministers at their request, and presented in June 2001.20
                  than some other respiratory and enteric viruses. Its social     It was never formally accepted for publication and
L e a r n i n g




                  and economic impact, however, was enormous, and its             dissemination. Some of the key findings highlight
                  collateral clinical consequences are still being measured.      potential areas of concern for all Canadians including:



                  64        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

• an overall erosion of the public health system, with         of a single mid-sized general hospital could hugely
  survey respondents in key positions noting the reduced       augment PHI for larger provinces. However, the
  capacity to address ongoing and emergent challenges          Committee is under no illusions about the continuing
  to public health such as water quality safety and            competitive spending pressures on provincial and
  management of infectious diseases;                           territorial governments. In the chapters that follow, we
                                                               are recommending that a substantial majority of the new
• significant disparities in public health capacity now
                                                               federal spending on public health be directed to initiatives
  exist across Canada;
                                                               and programs that will create a seamless, strengthened,
• concerns that the relative low priority given to longer-     and collaborative F/P/T public health system.
  term disease and injury prevention strategies is
  increasing threats to the health of Canadians and            In shaping new programs and structures, what general
  undermining the sustainability of the health care            lessons can Canadians learn from public health systems
  delivery system;                                             in other countries?
• a lack of written multi-year plans covering the five
                                                               First and foremost, the US, the UK and Australia each have
  core areas of public health practice in more than half
                                                               a coherent chain of policy, stretching from legislation,
  the jurisdictions;
                                                               national goals and priorities, national strategies, programs
• insufficient efforts in staff development and growing        to sustain the public health infrastructure (including
  recruitment/retention difficulties;                          human resources), means of reaching agreement between
                                                               stakeholders, and specific funding programs. There are
• uncertain capacity of jurisdictions to deal with more
                                                               quantifiable targets with timelines, and accountability
  than one emergency at a time, or to deliver some core
                                                               mechanisms. In contrast, Canada does not have national
  programs, particularly to northern and Aboriginal
                                                               health goals or strategies. Even the extant national
  communities; and
                                                               indicators arising from the Health Accords are focused
• limited access to health information and eroding             on the personal health care system.
  leadership on key public health issues.
                                                               Second, many countries have agencies for public health
The SARS outbreak has affirmed these observations.             led by a recognized expert in the field. Embedding
It illustrates an urgent need to strengthen not only the       public health functions inside the usual bureaucracy may
federal role, but also the P/T public health infrastructure.   enhance the crosswalk to other health activities, but
The effectiveness of the public health system depends          tends to blur the professional career path for those with
critically upon capacity at local and provincial/territorial   special training in the relevant disciplines, impede the




                                                                                                                              C a n a d a
levels. In turn, this demands a well-trained, adequate,        agility of responses to public health emergencies, and
and fully prepared workforce, and information and              augment the politicization of inter-jurisdictional activity.
surveillance systems that can detect health threats rapidly,   A distinct agency can still be held to account through a
analyse and interpret data and communicate the resulting       variety of mechanisms, and its credibility, for better or
information to health care providers and the general           worse, is enhanced by its distance from the usual




                                                                                                                              i n
public as needed. The same infrastructure that will help       machinery of government. Furthermore, these agencies
combat the next outbreak of SARS or a similar communi-         in other nations help build PHI by continually and
cable disease will also provide Canadians with enhanced        generously investing in the training and continuing


                                                                                                                              H e a l t h
health protection and preventive capacity to reduce the        education of skilled personnel. This must be a high
burden of non-communicable diseases.                           priority for any Canadian public health agency.

The 2000 and 2003 Health Accords provided major                Third, the scope of public health agencies varies. Some
transfers of funds to the provinces for health spending.       are focused on infectious diseases alone; others have a
                                                                                                                              P u b l i c



These transfers offer provinces a resource base that, if       general mandate. We see the rationale for single-focus
they choose, can be tapped to enhance public health            agencies, and commend the work of British Columbia’s
infrastructure [PHI]. And, given the very small percentage     Centre for Disease Control as a provincial exemplar in
of publicly-funded health spending directed to public          the infectious disease field. Federally, Canada already has
health functions, the levels of investment that would          a Centre for Infectious Disease Prevention and Control
                                                                                                                              o f




have a transformative effect on public health capacity are     under the auspices of PPHB. The Committee believes
comparatively small—ranging by province from tens of           that any new national agency must encompass a full
                                                                                                                              R e n e w a l




millions to the low hundreds of millions annually. A           spectrum of public health activities through a variety of
new allocation or re-allocation equivalent to the budget       component centres, as exemplified by the USA’s CDC,


..........................................................................................                              65
                  .................................................................................................

                  and intriguingly, Quebec’s National Institute of Public        would support a network of expertise, have sufficient
                  Health. The scope of the agency nonetheless requires           credibility, enjoy collegial relations, and move swiftly
                  careful assessment as we shall show in the next chapter.       across bridges of inter-jurisdictional agreements to help
                                                                                 in local outbreak investigations and management. This
                  Fourth, the Committee has been struck by the fact that         is one reason why, as will be elaborated in Chapter 5, we
                  other federations, such as Australia and the USA, also         envisage a network focused on infectious diseases along
                  face challenges from the divergent capacity of different       with a system of secondments and sharing of personnel
                  provinces or states and territories. The Australian and        designed to create a culture of collaboration.
                  US response is to confront the challenges of regional
                  pluralism with earmarked funding, mechanisms to foster         Transfers are the other policy instrument in the federal
                  inter-jurisdictional collaboration and coordination, and       tool-kit. As noted above, the federal government currently
                  agreement on explicit performance standards. Canada            operates a program of grants and contributions through
                  needs a more consistent public health system with              PPHB. This system moves approximately $200 million
                  maximum inter-jurisdictional collaboration on essential        per annum primarily to NGOs, and aims at addressing
                  functions. Governments in other nations have provided          various determinants of health through programs in areas
                  examples of steps that can be taken to meet this need for      such as prenatal nutrition, Aboriginal early childhood
                  our citizens.                                                  development, healthy living, and prevention of various
                                                                                 non-communicable diseases. This set of transfers should
                  In seeking to foster a stronger and more integrated            be aligned with a new national public health strategy.
                  national public health system, the Government of Canada        But what is clearly needed as well is a serious investment
                  can variously use legislation and regulation, provide infor-   directed at the support of provincial, territorial, and
                  mation and advice, deliver programs itself, or make transfer   municipal public health infrastructure. To this end, both
                  payments to individuals, organizations, and other levels       the American and Australian examples are important.
                  of government. Each of these has a role to play.               Their systems of grants and related agreements with
                                                                                 states and territories, incorporating clear targets and
                  As summarized in Chapter 9, new legislation and regulation     reporting mechanisms, exemplify the approach that a
                  could be dovetailed with the recognized need for Ottawa        new Canadian agency could use to build capacity in
                  to revise and consolidate all of its public health and         accordance with both a national public health strategy
                  health protection legislation. A national public health        and the needs of specific P/T jurisdictions.
                  system would also be facilitated by a stronger national
                  presence, established arm’s-length from Health Canada but      The Committee is concerned that new funding for
                  accountable to the Minister of Health and Parliament,          provinces and territories not displace current spending,
                  that would provide credible information, advice, and           and end up transferred within provincial health budgets
                  technical support to provinces and territories. The USA’s      to become another drop in the ever-leaking acute care
                  CDC is exemplary in these respects. SARS has shown that        bucket. New funding should neither preferentially under-
                  an outbreak in one province (or nation) affects all others.    write those provinces that have chosen to invest at levels
                  Every province and territory would benefit from more           much below others nor disadvantage provinces such as
                  effective support for and coordination of public health        British Columbia and Quebec that have innovated and
                  activities. A strong federal presence is particularly impor-   invested in public health. Instead, we recommend that
                  tant in supporting smaller provinces faced with epidemics,     a new federal agency allocate these funds in such a way
                  and is critically important in international liaison.          that program expenditures roll up to reflect, with some
                                                                                 allowance for year-over-year variation, approximate
                  Direct program delivery by the federal government              population size, consistent with the Social Union
                  avoids skirmishing over cash transfers and accountability,     Framework Agreement.
S A R S




                  but the federal government cannot effectively deliver
                  local public health services nor does it have jurisdiction     The national agency should be free to set floors for
                  to do so. As in the USA, the federal government in             dovetailed provincial activity or matching conditions
                  Canada could instead become more directly involved in          before a particular provincial public health branch can
f r o m




                  surveillance in support of provinces and territories. The      receive earmarked program funds. The agency may also
                  Committee is also impressed by the ability of the US           choose to underwrite all costs for particular provincial/
                  CDC to maintain a highly mobile, professionally-trained        municipal programs. What the Committee views as
                  emergency response structure capable of reacting rapidly       crucial, however, is that there be no bulk transfer or
L e a r n i n g




                  to outbreaks of infectious disease or other health             passive payments. The monies should be disaggregated
                  emergencies. In an ideal world, a new Canadian agency          into separate program grants, and different provinces



                  66        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

should receive funds for different purposes to promote        Last, in one nation after another, we see efforts made
achievement of a stronger and more consistent public          across jurisdictions to exchange and share data and
health infrastructure. Overall target setting for inter-      information. Public health practitioners were pioneering
jurisdictional division of funds thereby becomes a mecha-     users of health information in the eighteenth and
nism whereby provinces are both assured of receiving a        nineteenth centuries. More recently, public health, like
reasonably fair share of support for their own priorities,    the personal health care system, has been unable to take
and given incentives to set priorities for re-investment in   full advantage of innovations in information and
concert with the national agency.                             communication technologies. Three levels of government
                                                              are involved in public health, and as the SARS outbreak
Fifth, the areas of infectious disease surveillance and       demonstrated, public health must be connected to what
outbreak management need specific support and attention.      is happening in clinics, hospitals, and other parts of the
Ideally, outbreak management should be harmonized             health enterprise. Thus, information must move rapidly
with other provisions for health emergencies and these        to and from the clinical and public health frontlines.
arrangements in turn dovetailed with broader strategies       Both professionals and the media have been strongly
for emergency preparedness and response. To ensure            and justifiably critical of the difficulties in sharing
that these areas receive priority and avoid F/P/T tensions,   information across levels of government that became
it seems intuitively appealing to create a new network        evident in the recent outbreak of SARS. Special efforts
with earmarked funding inside the agency’s envelope for       must be made not only to invest in information
P/T contributions. This would be a uniquely Canadian          technology, but also to generate the intergovernmental
approach to reconcile some of the inter-jurisdictional        agreements and information standards that will give
uncertainties that arise with public health not just in our   Canada a leading-edge public health information system.
federation, but in other federal states as well.              These must be an integral part of rolling out any new
                                                              funding, whether for general public health renewal, or
Sixth, Australia, the UK, and the USA all have embedded       earmarked for infectious disease surveillance and outbreak
a strong research and science component in their public       management. Alongside these more informal agreements,
health activities. These countries provide a solid founda-    and notwithstanding any federal legislative renewal, one
tion in epidemiology, surveillance and health statistics,     can also envisage a process to upgrade and harmonize
to inform public health practice. The UK is the inter-        public health legislation across Canada, facilitating the
national leader in its efforts to ground public health        function of a truly seamless system to protect and promote
policies and services in solid evidence. Canada needs         the health of our citizens, wherever they live.
more applied public health research and evaluation,
more systematic reviews and public health practice            These are not tall orders. They presuppose in the first




                                                                                                                           C a n a d a
guidelines, better training in the generation and interpre-   instance only a visible and continuing commitment on
tation of public health evidence, and better means of         the part of all those who govern us to the principle that,
storing, maintaining and accessing the relevant knowledge     whatever other differences may inevitably separate us
for public health practice. These issues have been            in this sometimes-fractious federation, the health of
highlighted in a document produced by the Institute of        Canadians is paramount. Beyond that, the investment of




                                                                                                                           i n
Population and Public Health within the CIHR. Any new         new monies needed to transform public health is modest
agency must have a combination of in-house capacity           compared to numerous other spheres of public spending,
alongside funding to contract out R&D functions to            not least the personal health services sector. The single


                                                                                                                           H e a l t h
partners such as the CIHR. The challenges go beyond           question that the Committee would put to all health
public health and demand a review of our scientific           ministers, finance ministers, and first ministers is
capacity with respect to infectious diseases research;        accordingly simple: If not now, when?
further comments on this matter follow in Chapter 10.
                                                                                                                           P u b l i c
                                                                                                                           o f
                                                                                                                           R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                           67
                  .................................................................................................

                                                                                14. Romanow, Roy, “Building on Values: The Future of
                  References                                                        Health Care in Canada,” Commission on the Future
                  1. Kuiken, Thijs, et al, “Newly discovered coronavirus as         of Health Care in Canada, November 2002.
                     the primary cause of severe acute respiratory              15. Frank, John and di Ruggiero, Erica, “Public Health in
                     syndrome”, The Lancet, 2003, 362: 263-70.                      Canada: what are the real issues?”, Canadian Journal
                  2. Naylor, C. David, “Private Practice, Public Payment:           of Public Health, 2003, 94(3): 190-192, CIHR Institute
                     Canadian medicine and the politics of health                   of Population and Public Health, Toronto.
                     insurance, 1911-1966,” McGill Queen’s University           16. The Standing Committee on Social Affairs, Science
                     Press, Montreal, 1986: 35-37.                                  and Technology (Michael Kirby, chair), “The Health
                  3. McKeown, Thomas, “The role of medicine: dream,                 of Canadians—The Federal Role,” Volume Six:
                     mirage or nemesis?”, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1979.            Recommendations for Reform (Chapter 13), Ottawa,
                                                                                    October, 2002.
                  4. Public Health in England, “The Report of the
                     Committee of Injury into the Future Development of         17. Health Care Renewal Accord 2003.
                     the Public Health Function,” Cmnd 289, London:                 (www.hc-sc.gc.ca/english/hca2003/)
                     HMSO, 1988.                                                18. The Institute of Medicine, “The Future of the
                  5. Report of the Premier’s Advisory Council on Health             Public’s Health in the 21st Century,” published
                     (Donald Mazankowski, Chair), “A Framework for Reform,”         November 2002, National Academies Press.
                     2001. (www.premiersadvisory.com/reform.html)                   (www.nap.edu/catalog/10548.html)

                  6. Public Health Act R.S.Q., 2001 c60, s5.                    19. Wente, Margaret. Globe and Mail, May 5, 2003,
                                                                                    p. A15.
                  7. Rose, Geoffrey, “The population mean predicts the
                     number of deviant individuals,” British Medical Journal,   20. Federal/Provincial/Territorial Advisory Committee
                     1990; 301:1031-4.                                              on Population Health, “Review of Public Health
                                                                                    Capacity in Canada,” Report to the Conference of
                  8. Wilson, Kumanan, “The complexities of multi-level              Deputy Ministers of Health, June 2001.
                     governance in public health”, (unpublished).
                  9. Lalonde, Marc (Minister of National Health and
                     Welfare), “A New Perspective on the Health of
                     Canadians,” Ottawa: 1974.
                  10. Lederberg, Joshua, Shope, Robert E. and Oaks,
                      Stanley C. (eds.), “Emerging Infections, Microbial
                      Threats to Health in the United States,” Committee
                      on Emerging Microbial Threats to Health, Institute
                      of Medicine), National Academy Press: Washington
                      D.C, 1992.
                  11. Krever, Horace, “Commission of Inquiry on the
                      Blood System in Canada,” Volume 3, p. 1073,
                      released November 26, 1997.
                  12. Government of Quebec, “Emerging Solutions,”
                      Commission d’étude sur les services de santé et les
S A R S




                      services sociaux, June 2000.
                  13. Government of Newfoundland and Labrador,
                      “Healthier Together: A Strategic Health Plan for
                      Newfoundland and Labrador.” Department of Health
f r o m




                      and Community Services, released Sept. 10, 2002.
                      (www.gov.nf.ca/health/strategichealthplan/pdf/
                      HealthyTogetherdocument.pdf)
L e a r n i n g




                  68        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


Appendix 3.1
US Department of Health and Human
Services Organizational Chart

                                                            The Secretary
                                                             Deputy Secretary

                                                                                                     Chief of Staff
                     Director, Intergovernmental
                        Affairs, & Secretary’s
                      Regional Representatives                                                   Executive Secretary



                                           Assistant Secretary,                 Commissioner,
       Assistant Secretary                 Administration for                   Food and Drug
                                          Children and Families                 Administration                          General Counsel
           for Health
                                                  (ACF)                             (FDA)


                                                                                Administrator,
       Assistant Secretary                 Assistant Secretary,                                                     Assistant Secretary
                                                                           Health Resources and
       for Administration                Administration on Aging                                                     for Public Health
                                                                           Services Administration
         & Management                             (AoA)                                                           Emergency Preparedness
                                                                                   (HRSA)


       Assistant Secretary                   Administrator,                                                            Director, Center for
                                                                                  Director,
     for Budget, Technology,             Centers for Medicare &                                                         Faith-Based and
                                                                            Indian Health Service
            & Finance                      Medicaid Services                                                          Community Initiatives
                                                                                    (IHS)
                                                  (CMS)

                                                Director,
                                          Agency for Healthcare                    Director,
       Assistant Secretary                                                                                                   Director,
                                           Research and Quality          National Institutes of Health
    for Planning & Evaluation                                                                                         Office for Civil Rights
                                                 (AHRQ)                             (NIH)


                                                 Director,                      Administrator,




                                                                                                                                                     C a n a d a
       Assistant Secretary                 Centers for Disease          Substance Abuse and Mental
                                                                                                                       Inspector General
         for Legislation                  Control and Prevention        Health Services Adminstration
                                                  (CDC)                          (SAMHSA)

                                            Administrator,
                                      Agency for Toxic Substances                Director,                                Chair,
       Assistant Secretary                                                Program Support Center
        for Public Affairs               and Disease Registry                                                   Departmental Appeals Board




                                                                                                                                                     i n
                                               (ATSDR)                            (PSC)




                                                                                                                                                     H e a l t h
                                                                                                                                                     P u b l i c
                                                                                                                                                     o f
                                                                                                                                                     R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                                                      69
                               SARS and Public Health
Chapter 4



ENHANCING THE PUBLIC HEALTH INFRASTRUCTURE:
A Prescription for Renewal
.................................................................................................



Chapters 2 and 3 have shown how and why the infra-             • An effective governance structure to ensure clear
structure that supports the delivery of public health            decision making authority and public
services in Canada is fragile and uneven. Canadians              accountability, that ensures clarity of roles and
must be able to rely upon public health to protect them          responsibilities within a systems-wide perspective, and
from hazards to health, known and as-yet-unknown,                maximizes resources to achieve public health
while providing the full range of public health services.        objectives.
Some phenomena are predictable (e.g., “flu season”), but
                                                               • Visibility for, and leadership of, the public health
most public health threats are unpredictable in their timing
                                                                 community and effective communication with the
and location. As the SARS episode has demonstrated,
                                                                 public.
they can also be unpredictable in their nature. The struc-
tures and processes required to enable core public health      • Mechanisms to consult and undertake collaborative
functions constitute the public health infrastructure            planning to develop national strategies for important
[PHI]. This infrastructure is analogous to personal health       public health issues.
services, where clinical interventions such as surgery and
                                                               • Mechanisms to support non-governmental
drug therapy require an infrastructure of hospitals,
                                                                 organizations and to consult with them.
doctors, nurses, equipment, medical schools, a pharma-
ceutical industry and so on. Hence, in this chapter, we        b. The Public Health Workforce




                                                                                                                             C a n a d a
consider the nature of the PHI and recommend strategies
                                                               • Appropriate number of staff.
for renewing it at the federal, provincial/territorial, and
municipal levels.                                              • Standards for qualifications and competencies.
                                                               • Health human resource planning for public health.
4A. Core Elements of the Public


                                                                                                                             i n
                                                               • Accessible and effective training programs in a
    Health Infrastructure                                        number of formats.



                                                                                                                             H e a l t h
The PHI schema set out below is similar to that used by        • Lifelong learning and career-development
the CDC. The first three categories apply across the             opportunities.
system at the local, P/T and national levels.                  c. Optimal Business Processes and Information
                                                                  and Knowledge Systems
a. Organizational Capacity
                                                                                                                             P u b l i c


                                                               • Defined, optimized and agreed programs and business
• Agreed strategies to maintain the capacity of the              processes, including a streamlined and enhanced
  public health system, to effect improvement in major           capacity to assist with the management of outbreaks
  health issues, to set priorities and make strategic            of disease and threats to health, including linkages to
  investments.                                                   clinical systems.
                                                                                                                             o f




• Modern legislation, harmonized across jurisdictions.         • Standards and best practices.
• Defined essential functions, programs and services.
                                                                                                                             R e n e w a l




                                                               • Research related to population and public health.




..........................................................................................                              71
                  .................................................................................................

                  • A central resource for knowledge translation and
                    evidence-based decision-making, including the
                                                                                4B. A New National Public Health
                    identification of research needs.                               Focus
                  • Evaluation of population and public health programs.        4B.1 General Considerations
                  • An information infrastructure, including information
                                                                                Many submissions from health stakeholders have called
                    architecture, models and standards, technology
                                                                                for a revitalization of the public health organization at
                    transfer, privacy and information management,
                                                                                the national level and the creation of a professionalized
                    development of data sources, and system development.
                                                                                extra-governmental centre of expertise. For example, the
                                                                                Canadian Medical Association has recommended the
                  To these three categories one can add a fourth category
                                                                                “creation of a Canadian Office for Disease Surveillance
                  of functions that fall naturally to the national level.
                                                                                and Control as the lead Canadian agency in public
                  These include highly technical or scarce expertise,
                                                                                health, operating at arm’s length from government.”
                  facilities or equipment that constitute a specialized
                                                                                The Canadian Public Health Association reported on
                  reserve or surge capacity that is best provided or
                                                                                consultations showing “that the critical first step must be
                  organized nationally, and formal international liaison
                                                                                to increase current front-line public health capacity and
                  activities. The federal public health function is a
                                                                                to establish a National Public Health Agency.” The
                  participant in the first three categories, and the provider
                                                                                Canadian Infectious Disease Society also favoured a
                  of the fourth.
                                                                                “CDC North” with a specific mandate for infectious
                                                                                disease prevention and control.
                  d. National Strategic Capacity
                  • Continuing national resources                               We have seen above that a national agency for public
                                                                                health is a common pattern in other countries of the
                     – technical assistance
                                                                                Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
                     – development of technical protocols and practice          [OECD]. The Population and Public Health Branch [PPHB]
                       guidelines                                               of Health Canada currently operates many of the core
                                                                                federal public health functions for Canada. Its organiza-
                     – reference laboratories
                                                                                tion chart (see Appendix 4.1) includes multiple centres,
                  • Specialized surge capacity                                  some headquartered outside of Ottawa. In suggesting a
                                                                                major restructuring of Branch activities, the Committee
                     – personnel
                                                                                intends no disrespect to the culture or accomplishments
                     – materiel                                                 of Health Canada or the federal public service in general.
                                                                                However, the current placement of public health functions
                     – logistics assistance
                                                                                within a department of government puts public health
                     – management and/or coordination of outbreaks and          professionals inside a very large organization and a highly
                       emergencies                                              process-oriented culture with a particular orientation to
                                                                                the political issues of the day. One advantage highlighted
                  • International
                                                                                by many commentators has been the transparency and
                     – liaison with, and reporting to/from foreign              enhanced credibility arising from a clearer distinction
                       countries and international organizations                between scientific advice on the one hand, and policy-
                                                                                making within Health Canada and Parliament on the
                  This schema illustrates first and foremost that there are     other. A new agency could also provide expert advice to
                  no great mysteries in the organization of an effective        regulators in areas such as food safety, environmental
S A R S




                  public health system. Most of these functions are self-       hazards, and therapeutic products.
                  explanatory. Rather than elaborate on all of them here,
                  we shall focus on a few general and critical functions.       The processes by which policy is developed and communi-
                  Additional detail on outbreak management, disease             cated may be suboptimal for the provision of specialized
f r o m




                  surveillance, laboratories, and health human resources        public health services or even advice on regulatory matters.
                  follows in the next chapters.                                 Whereas the scientific process demands a relatively free
                                                                                flow of information, governments tend to seek control of
                                                                                communications and aim for a somewhat hierarchical
L e a r n i n g




                                                                                policy function leading towards the ultimate democratic
                                                                                authority—Parliamentary debate and decision making.



                  72        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

Some observers believe that one organization cannot                           4B.2 What Does ‘National’ Mean?
discharge both functions concurrently; rather, these streams
should be brought together by building stronger bridges                       The lexicon of Canadian F/P/T politics, and the need to
between the distillers of evidence and the framers of                         reinforce public health infrastructure at all levels of
policy. Moreover, a service orientation and collaborative                     government lead logically to consideration of two options
culture are essential if the new national agency is to                        for a national agency. One is an F/P/T agency, accountable
fulfill the mandate that Canadians rightly expect of it.                      to federal, provincial, and territorial representatives. This
These attributes are at least partially distinct from other                   is the model endorsed by the Council of Chief Medical
policy-making functions.                                                      Officers of Health. The other is a federal agency, more
                                                                              closely resembling the USA’s CDC.
The Committee believes scientists and professionals would
find an arm’s-length public health agency more attractive                     We begin with F/P/T agency options. One current
as a place of employment. An agency would enjoy greater                       example is the Canadian Institute for Health Information
flexibility in developing cooperative or contractual                          [CIHI]; it has blended F/P/T funding and governance.
arrangements with academic institutions and other private                     Albeit structured as a non-profit corporation, the Canadian
partners, thus facilitating research and enhancing access                     Blood Services [CBS] is another distinct variant. It is
to first-class talent. Agency status might also provide for                   P/T-governed and-funded, with the federal government
a longer time horizon and greater stability of funding,                       acting as the national regulator for the agency. Creating
with less risk of diversion of funds to other purposes.                       any such agencies would involve difficult and time-
                                                                              consuming negotiations that could exacerbate existing
The creation of an agency cannot depoliticize traffic among                   tensions at F/P/T tables. CIHI has a more limited service
jurisdictions, but it could reduce the chances that the                       mandate and much smaller budget than would be
health of Canadians would inadvertently be held hostage                       encompassed by the existing public health functions.
in a jurisdictional disagreement among levels of govern-                      The F/P/T agency option would also blur lines of
ment. An agency standing outside government and led                           accountability. As Prof. Kumanan Wilson1 advised the
by a public health professional could find new ways to                        Committee, the CBS model has other drawbacks. It has
engage public health professionals in the provinces and                       been criticized by provinces for importing the US problem
territories, and re-energize the public health workforce.                     of unfunded federal mandates to Canada, because it
Creation of an agency would also bring the delivery of                        couples national regulation to provincial supply and
public health services in line with public health in many                     payment. Even assuming new federal funds to cost-share
other countries.                                                              the operation of a P/T-governed national agency, and
                                                                              federal regulations to create consistency of operations




                                                                                                                                                  C a n a d a
By analogy, personal health services themselves are                           across provinces, this variant seems wholly impractical.
generally not delivered directly by federal or provincial                     In general, the F/P/T agency option is not compatible
governments. They are devolved to a vast number of                            with calls for clarity of roles along with renewed federal
individuals, institutions, and agencies. We see potential                     and provincial strength in public health.
for better partnership with personal health service
                                                                              SARS has nonetheless underscored for Canadians the




                                                                                                                                                  i n
providers through a new public health agency, particularly
given the sometimes acrimonious interactions around                           need for coordination of functions in areas such as disease
health care at F/P/T tables in recent years. An agency                        surveillance, outbreak management, and emergency


                                                                                                                                                  H e a l t h
would also provide some continuity of leadership and                          response. These areas inescapably involve a roll up of
insulate public health functions from the lamentably                          activities from the municipal or regional to the provincial,
short terms in office of senior F/P/T health officials and                    interprovincial, and federal levels. We shall return to
health ministers during the last decade.                                      these points in Chapter 5. For now, the Committee will
                                                                              simply highlight the logical appeal of an F/P/T network
                                                                                                                                                  P u b l i c



                                                                              structured to reinforce and help coordinate disease
                                                                              surveillance and outbreak management on a truly pan-
                                                                              Canadian basis, linked to the work of the successful F/P/T
                                                                              network that is already operating in the realm of
                                                                              emergency preparedness and response. A new infectious
                                                                                                                                                  o f




                                                                              diseases network would need earmarked funding that
                                                                                                                                                  R e n e w a l




1 Interested readers can find more information on Wilson’s work on federalism at http://www.iigr.ca/publication/detail.php?publication=301
  (accessed on August 21, 2003).



..........................................................................................                                                   73
                  .................................................................................................

                  could flow from a federal agency to provincial centres          Departmental Service Organizations are operational
                  and agencies on an equitable, transparent, and strictly         units or clusters of units within a department. They are
                  mission-oriented basis. It could become a bulwark against       organized to deliver services to the department’s clients.
                  new threats such as SARS. Such a network, however,              Like SOAs, they operate within a management framework
                  requires a strong federal node that can pull its weight in      approved by the deputy minister and the Treasury Board,
                  disease surveillance, outbreak management, and emergency        but may represent a larger share of the department’s overall
                  response. And, for reasons given in Chapter 3, the federal      activity than a typical SOA. No separate legislation is
                  government must be positioned to work more generally            required. Environment Canada’s Meteorological Service
                  in support of provincial and municipal public health            is the only such organization in existence. Again, this
                  programs. To these ends, the Committee endorses the             option does not provide the required independence or
                  creation of a new federal public health entity which, for       opportunity to integrate activity from multiple
                  ease of reference, we shall term the Canadian Agency for        departments.
                  Public Health.
                                                                                  Separate (statutory) agencies, also known as Legislated
                  4B.3 The Structure of a New Federal                             Service Agencies [LSA] or Departmental Corporations,
                       Agency for Public Health                                   provide a fourth option. Included in this category are
                                                                                  the Canadian Food Inspection Agency, the Canadian
                  The Committee considered some options available in the          Institutes of Health Research, Statistics Canada and the
                  current machinery of government.                                Canada Customs and Revenue Agency. These are mission-
                                                                                  driven organizations established by specific legislation to
                  A Crown Corporation offers substantial independence             manage the organization and delivery of services within
                  from the financial and personnel controls that accompany        the federal government. They typically perform adminis-
                  departmental administration. The enabling legislation           trative, research, supervisory, advisory and/or regulatory
                  for each Crown corporation sets out the corporation’s           services of a governmental nature. Legislation sets out
                  mandate, powers and objectives. Crown corporations are          the framework under which each agency will operate
                  accountable to Parliament through assigned responsible          including its mandate, governance regime, powers and
                  ministers. The federal government retains power and             authorities, and accountability requirements.
                  influence over Crown corporations through: i) the
                  appointment and remuneration of directors and chief             Separate agencies differ only slightly from each other.
                  executive officers; ii) directives and regulations; and iii)    They have the following common characteristics:
                  approval of corporate plans and budgets. The Committee
                  concludes that a Crown Corporation removes the new              • headed by a chief executive officer [CEO] reporting
                  agency too far from Parliament and government—a                   directly to the Minister;
                  point of concern given the need to ensure integration of
                                                                                  • supported by a “Board” with members appointed by
                  public health activity with a wide variety of departments,
                                                                                    the Governor in Council;
                  not least Health Canada itself.
                                                                                  • subject to Ministerial direction;
                  Special Operating Agencies [SOA] are designed to
                                                                                  • separate employer under the Public Service Staff
                  balance controls (and risk avoidance) with encouragement
                                                                                    Relations Act (e.g., increases staffing authority/flexibility);
                  of innovation and initiative. SOAs support a set of
                  values—including innovation, enhanced authority at the          • managed on the basis of a corporate business plan;
                  front line, client-centred operation, self-regulation, better
                                                                                  • focus on performance and accounting for results;
                  management of people and accountability for results—
                  which will lead to greater efficiency of operation and          • greater financial and administrative authorities than
S A R S




                  improved service quality. SOA examples include Technology         traditional departments, e.g., ability to enter into
                  Partnerships Canada, Training and Development Canada              partnering/licensing arrangements and can obtain
                  and the Canadian Heritage Information Network. SOAs               non-lapsing spending/revenue retention/re-spending
                  are not independent legal entities, and are established           authority; and
f r o m




                  on the basis of Treasury Board approval. We reject this
                                                                                  • oversight by the Auditor General and subject to the
                  option on the grounds that SOAs remain part of, and
                                                                                    Official Languages Act, Privacy Act and Access to
                  accountable to, their home departmental organization,
                                                                                    Information Act and Federal Identity Program
                  with preservation of all existing labour relations.
L e a r n i n g




                                                                                    requirements.




                  74        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

As one example, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency             horizon, thereby escaping the perverse cycle of year-end
[CFIA] has some powers/authorities that distinguish it from     spending that persists in Ottawa, and enhanced flexibility
a “typical” department. These are listed for reference:         in selecting providers in areas such as information tech-
                                                                nology, legal services, and property management.
1. Separate employer (e.g., authority to appoint from
   outside of the public service, full control over classifi-   The new Canadian Agency for Public Health would
   cation, collective bargaining, pay and compensation);        report through its director to the Minister of Health.
                                                                The Minister would be ultimately responsible for the
2. Can set its owns fees and sell assets/services,
                                                                agency, as occurs with the US CDC. The legislation would
   e.g., training, accreditation, intellectual property, and
                                                                provide appropriate powers for delegation of ministerial
   retain revenue;
                                                                authorities to officials. The Minister would continue to
3. Funded through parliamentary appropriations but can          give policy direction to the agency and obtain any
   spend/carryover for two years at a time;                     information required to provide appropriate ministerial
                                                                oversight, direction and accountability. However, we
4. Enhanced F/P/T collaboration mechanisms, in that the
                                                                envisage that the agency would have a strong internal
   Agency can
                                                                priority-setting process and a clear strategic focus in its
   a. delegate inspection/quarantine powers to P/T              own right. In other words, the new agency would have
      public servants and private sector specialists;           meaningful autonomy as contrasted with, say, the
                                                                relationship between Finance Canada and the Canada
   b. enter into agreements with one or more P/T
                                                                Customs and Revenue Agency today.
      governments for the provision of services; and
   c. create F/P/T corporations to carry out joint              The constituting legislation might also include legal
      activities in a more “integrated” fashion;                authorities to access and use sensitive data sourced from
                                                                public and private sectors for public health purposes,
5. Choice of service providers, e.g., legal, property
                                                                creating a data enclave as exists for Statistics Canada.
   management services; and
                                                                Indeed, the public health data enclave might be a ‘Swiss
6. Increased contracting authority.                             bank’ within Statistics Canada itself. Absent such author-
                                                                ity, and given problems with extant privacy legislation as
Even a cursory review of these characteristics underscores      will be outlined later, the agency may have difficulties
the rationale for the Committee’s recommendation that           balancing the appropriate protection of privacy with its
the new federal public health agency be structured as a         performance expectations.
legislated service agency.




                                                                                                                              C a n a d a
                                                                As the agency would be part of the Health portfolio, the
The relevant legislation could be relatively skeletal with      Government would need to clarify and establish the
a view to timely passage. It would presumably include           appropriate roles and responsibilities of Health Canada,
appropriate and consolidated authorities to address public      as a department, in relation to the agency. We return to
health matters where the federal government is expected         the specific question of agency scope below.




                                                                                                                              i n
to provide leadership and action, such as national disease
outbreaks and emergencies, with or without additional           The agency would receive an annual appropriation from
authorities regarding national disease surveillance capacity.   Parliament, and be subject to Parliamentary scrutiny in the


                                                                                                                              H e a l t h
Spending authorities, however, would need to be determined      same manner as for departments. That is, the Auditor
and specified, especially given the need for the Agency to      General of Canada would provide oversight of the
use financial transfers as a means of strengthening             agency’s financial statements and performance, including
infrastructure and collaboration on a truly national basis.     an assessment of the fairness and reliability of the
                                                                performance information contained in the performance
                                                                                                                              P u b l i c



On the human resources side, it seems desirable for the         report to Parliament. The Institute would also be subject
organization to have the authorities of a separate employer     to all legislation governing departments, such as the
under the Public Service Staff Relations Act to allow it to     Official Languages Act, Canadian Human Rights Act, Access
address unique recruitment and retention challenges in          to Information Act and the Privacy Act.
an environment of global competition for scarce scientific
                                                                                                                              o f




and public health expertise. Two other desirable features
of agency status are the ability to use a 24-month financial
                                                                                                                              R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                              75
                  .................................................................................................

                                                                                discharging its responsibilities effectively. However,
                  4C. A Chief Public Health Officer                             given the visibility of the agency, appropriate ministerial
                      for Canada                                                oversight, and—as described below—the creation of a
                                                                                National Public Health Advisory Board, this conflict can
                  The Committee received a number of recommendations            be mitigated.
                  for the creation of a professionally-qualified leadership
                  role in public health at the national level. This is          Protections for the independence of the Chief Public
                  variously described as a Surgeon General, National Public     Health Officer can be devised that are analogous to those
                  Health Commissioner, Federal Chief Medical Officer of         in various provinces or territories. In urgent situations
                  Health, or Chief Public Health Officer of Canada. Among       where the health of their respective public is threatened,
                  the many stakeholder groups endorsing variations on           a P/T health officer often has independent authority to
                  this theme were: the Council of Chief Medical Officers        notify the public and advise on measures necessary for
                  of Health, the Canadian Medical Association, the              public protection. Specific provincial examples exist for
                  Canadian Federation of Nurses Unions, the Canadian            protection of the independence of chief health officers.
                  Association of Emergency Physicians, the Canadian Public      In British Columbia, the Provincial Health Officer has the
                  Health Association, and the Association of Canadian           power to report directly to the legislature:
                  Academic Healthcare Organizations.
                                                                                    If the Provincial health officer considers that the
                  Other countries have established similar positions.               interests of the people of British Columbia are best
                  In the UK, there are Chief Medical Officers for England,          served by making a report to the public on health
                  Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland; and the UK’s                issues in British Columbia, or on the need for
                  Health Protection Agency is headed by a public health             legislation or a change of policy or practice respecting
                  physician. In the USA, the Surgeon General and Director           health in British Columbia, the Provincial health
                  of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention are             officer must make that report in the manner the
                  both health professionals.                                        Provincial health officer considers most appropriate…
                                                                                    Each year the Provincial health officer must give
                  The Committee has considered different options regarding          the minister a report on the health of the people
                  this position. One would be to create a Surgeon General           of British Columbia including, if appropriate,
                  or ‘auditor-general for health’ who is arm’s length and           information about the health of the people as
                  apolitical. This public health watchdog could report              measured against population health targets, and
                  directly to the Minister as in the UK. A second and related       the minister must lay the report before the
                  option would be to establish the position as an officer of        Legislative Assembly as soon as practical.
                  Parliament. Officers of Parliament are generally those            (Health Act, ch 179, 2.3 (3) & (4))
                  who have cross-cutting functions related broadly to
                  government and governance. This does not square fully         In Manitoba, as a result of a review by the Ombudsman
                  with the public health role. In either case, the problem      of events surrounding a delay in notification of the
                  is that such an office would have moral authority but         public, the employment agreement between the province
                  little else. An alternative option would be to create the     and the Chief Medical Officer of Health states:
                  role, but nest it within an existing or new structure. For
                  example, in a new agency, a senior professional could be          While accountable to the Department, the Chief
                  the Chief Public Health Officer, analogous to the Chief           Medical Officer of Health may function autono-
                  Veterinary Officer of Canada who reports to the director          mously when necessary in the interests of the
                  of the CFIA. This is feasible, but again could leave the          health of the public. Under these circumstances,
                  Chief Public Health Officer in a rather awkward position          the Chief Medical Officer of Health has the
S A R S




                  as regards independently raising issues of broad concern          authority to issue public health advisories and
                  for public health.                                                bulletins, or take other actions. The Chief Medical
                                                                                    Officer of Health will inform the Deputy Minister
                  If the Chief Public Health Officer were also to be the            and/or the Minister prior to such actions or as soon
f r o m




                  chief executive of the new federal agency for public              as practically possible, in accordance with
                  health, then he/she has a logical position of advocacy            established protocols. (Schedule “I”, (12))
                  and leadership, and the tools to advance an agenda of
                  change. We acknowledge potential conflicts of interest
L e a r n i n g




                  in the dual role: i.e., the Chief Public Health Officer has
                  an interest in ensuring that the agency is perceived to be



                  76        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

In short, appropriate safeguards for the independence of
the Chief Public Health Officer of Canada can be set
                                                              4D. Scope of the Canadian
in place without compromising her/his accountability as           Agency for Public Health
an agency director.
                                                              Public health agencies, centres, and institutes around the
The Chief Public Health Officer of Canada would be a          world vary greatly in their scope. It is premature for the
leading national voice for public health, particularly in     Committee to recommend exactly which activities and
outbreaks and other health emergencies, and a highly          programs should be included at this point, beyond
visible symbol of a federal commitment to protecting          indicating our support for a strong and integrative
and improving Canadians’ health. She or he should             organization. Instead, a systematic review of the scope of
obviously be trained and adept in crisis communications.      the new agency is needed. While there is also an option
The Chief Public Health Officer of Canada should be           to have two, or more, agencies, as in the UK, we endorse
required to report to Parliament on an annual basis on        a unitary structure. A list of areas for inclusion follows,
the state of public health, and given authority to make a     together with a table indicating which activities fall
special report to a special parliamentary committee on        within the scope of particular centres or agencies in
any matter of pressing importance or urgency that should      different jurisdictions.
not be deferred.
                                                              1. infectious disease, prevention & control
Additional duties of the Chief Public Health Officer of       2. microbiology reference laboratories
Canada could include:
                                                              3. emergency preparedness & response
• to protect and advance the health of Canadians by           4. chemical exposures
  advocating for effective disease prevention and health
  promotion programs and activities;                          5. poison control

• to articulate scientifically-based health policy analysis   6. environmental health
  and advice to the federal minister of health and, as        7. chronic disease prevention & control
  requested, provincial and territorial ministers of
  health, on the full range of critical public health and     8. injury prevention & control
  public health system issues;                                9. perinatal & child health/human development
• to provide leadership in promoting special health              (programs)
  initiatives, (e.g., relating to health inequalities,        10. health promotion grants




                                                                                                                            C a n a d a
  childhood injuries, Aboriginal health) with
  governmental and non-governmental entities, both            11. tobacco control
  domestically and internationally; and                       12. drug control
• to elevate the quality of public health practice in the     13. screening
  professional disciplines through the advancement of




                                                                                                                            i n
  appropriate standards and research priorities.              14. occupational health
                                                              15. food protection


                                                                                                                            H e a l t h
                                                              16. radiation protection
                                                              17. knowledge translation
                                                              18. research
                                                                                                                            P u b l i c


                                                              19. infostructure
                                                              20. international collaboration
                                                                                                                            o f
                                                                                                                            R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                            77
                  .................................................................................................


                    Agencies                                                                  Components
                    BC CDC                                                                    1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 12, 15, 16, 18, 20
                    Quebec’s National Institute of Public Health                              1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 18 20
                    New Zealand Institute for Environmental Science Research                  1, 2, 4, 6, 18, 19
                    U.K. Health Protection Agency                                             1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 18
                    U.K. Health Development Agency                                            9, 17
                    European Centre for Disease Prevention & Control                          1, 3
                    Finland: National Public Health Institute                                 1, 2, 6, 11, 18
                    Sweden: Institute for Infectious Disease Control                          1, 2, 18
                    Norwegian Institute of Public Health (Folkehelseinstituttet)              1, 2, 18
                    U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention                           1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 17, 18, 19, 20
                    Canadian Food Inspection Agency                                           15


                  In Canada, a range of government departments and                 Zoonoses are of special interest to the Committee, for
                  agencies engage in public health activities, including the       obvious reasons. The SARS coronavirus is simply the
                  Canadian Food Inspection Agency, Canadian Customs                latest in a growing number of viruses that are believed to
                  and Revenue Agency, Citizenship and Immigration                  have moved from animals to humans with devastating
                  Canada, Indian and Northern Affairs, and Environment             effects in recent decades. Currently, the Chief Veterinary
                  Canada. In each of these cases, a working relationship           Officer of Canada works within the CFIA, serving as
                  exists with Health Canada. This division of roles may            Executive Director of the Agency’s Animal Products
                  not be uniformly optimal. As one example, the area of            Division, with responsibility for administration of the
                  environmental impacts on health has been seriously               Health of Animals Act. More specific responsibilities include
                  neglected in Canada and requires urgent investment; we           surveillance systems, certifying that Canada is free of the
                  envisage this as a program of activity that must be              International Organization for Epizootics (usually known
                  supported by the new agency.                                     by the French acronym, OIE) “A” list diseases, representing
                                                                                   Canada internationally, and helping to manage veterinary
                  Specific programs within Health Canada also deal with            epidemics of notifiable and reportable diseases.
                  non-regulatory aspects of tobacco and nutrition. One
                  view is that these functions should stay linked to the           At risk of oversimplification, one can say that the CFIA
                  corresponding regulatory activities; another would argue         would consider an animal disease part of its mandate if it
                  that they should be rolled into the new agency. The              led to a food safety or food trade concern, or if it were
                  Committee believes that regulation of food, pharma-              legislated to be responsible for a disease. This leads to the
                  ceuticals, therapeutic products, pesticides, or consumer         odd situation whereby rabies and equine encephalitis
                  products should remain outside the mandate of the                (which are human health risks, but of little food safety
                  agency. While its work should inform the regulation of           concern) are considered part of the CFIA mandate
                  environmental hazards, and occasionally generate expert          because of legislation, whereas West Nile virus (a human
                  advice for federal regulatory functions as listed, the agency    and animal health concern but not a food safety issue) is
                  would not be expected to deal with the mechanics of              outside of its mandate. As outlined in a submission from
S A R S




                  regulation. For reasons that will be outlined in the next        the Canadian Veterinary Medical Association [CVMA],
                  chapter, the Committee envisages that the Centre for             veterinarians collaborate across federal, provincial, and
                  Emergency Preparedness and Response would be sited in            territorial governments, and extensive lists of notifiable
                  the new agency, albeit with continued cross-linkages to          and reportable animal diseases are maintained and
f r o m




                  other departments throughout the federal government.             updated. The CVMA states, “Despite the extensive
                  The new agency should create opportunities to engage in          animal disease surveillance programs, there is no direct
                  activities that currently receive less attention in Health       link with public health care programs; not at the national
                  Canada than might be deemed ideal, such as injury                level, the provincial level, or at the local level…There is a
L e a r n i n g




                  prevention and control and mental health.                        much clearer role for veterinarians defined in federal statutes
                                                                                   for animal disease control, and particularly for Reportable
                                                                                   diseases, than seems to be the case for human health.”


                  78         .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

Zoonotics do have coverage within existing Health
Canada structures. These include the Food Safety and
                                                                4E. A Federal Agency with a
Zoonotics Division within the Centre for Infectious Disease         Pan-Canadian Orientation
Prevention and Control, the Laboratory for Zoonotics
and Special Pathogens at the National Microbiology              Jurisdictional ambiguities and tensions have long
Laboratory and the Laboratory for Foodborne Zoonoses            bedevilled public health activities and programs as well
in Guelph. Nonetheless, the new agency will clearly need        as personal health services in Canada. Chapter 9 reviews
to develop strong partnerships with academic veterinary         how the federal government might work with the
medicine and the veterinary practice community in Canada.       provinces to clarify some of these jurisdictional ambiguities
In this respect, the Committee notes that the 1994 Lac          and strengthen its legislative role in public health as part
Tremblant report recommended that the government of             of the omnibus review of health legislation that is
the day should “[a]ddress zoonoses, such that an effective      underway. However, attempts at unilateral centralization
means of information sharing be established between all         of authority in a fragile federation with a complex
the interested groups (i.e., veterinary medicine, Agriculture   division of powers and responsibilities are generally a
Canada, regulatory bodies, Canadian Cooperative                 prescription for conflict, not progress. Measures to create
Wildlife Health Centre, public health).” Progress has           collegiality, consensus, and commonality of purpose can
been made, but more is needed.                                  lead to collaborative work that overcomes jurisdictional
                                                                tensions. Indeed, as already stated, part of the rationale
As noted above, another function that should be strength-       for a new agency is to remove it some distance from
ened and vested at least partly with a new agency is the        F/P/T fault lines. We accordingly review here some of the
production of an annual report on the health status of          features of the agency that would give it a national rather
Canadians, as well as other reports focused on specific         than federal flavour and orientation. Three salient
aspects of population health from time to time. Currently       features are the distribution of the functions of the new
CIHI produces an annual report on the health of Canadians.      agency, creation of what we term, after the Australian
This information and the related analytical capacity are        precedent, the Public Health Partnerships Program to
essential for the new agency in setting targets and working     flow funds to provinces, territories and municipalities in
towards them collaboratively with the provinces and             support of front-line public health functions, and the
territories.                                                    appointment of a National Public Health Advisory Board
                                                                drawing on an F/P/T nomination process.
We have deliberately left an issue of great importance for
final comment in this section. The health status indicators
for Canada’s First Nations and Inuit peoples are dramati-
                                                                4E.1 One Agency, Many Locations
cally worse than those for the majority populations.




                                                                                                                                 C a n a d a
                                                                Health Canada currently operates a system of regional
These health status disparities are a national disgrace.        offices, with the headquarters of the Department in
They exist for a variety of infectious diseases as well as      Ottawa at Tunney’s Pasture. Few of the core functions of
non-communicable illnesses. Addressing them requires a          PPHB are sited in these regional offices, and their
wide-angle approach to health determinants and commu-           connections to provincial and municipal health agencies
nity development that must clearly be integrally supported      vary from one office to the next. We see little merit in




                                                                                                                                 i n
and guided by the affected Aboriginal communities. A            spreading agency staff through these offices. On the other
continuing challenge in mounting appropriate responses          hand, PPHB does have major foci outside of Ottawa.
is a recurring tension between the right and aspirations

                                                                                                                                 H e a l t h
                                                                Particularly pertinent given the Committee’s mandate
of Aboriginal peoples to greater self-determination within      are the National Microbiology Laboratory in Winnipeg,
the Canadian federation, and the uncertain effectiveness
                                                                Manitoba, and the Laboratory on Foodborne Zoonoses
and efficiency of reinforcing the extant pattern of separate
                                                                in Guelph, Ontario.
health systems for First Nations and Inuit communities.
Early in its deliberations, the Committee made a strategic
                                                                                                                                 P u b l i c


                                                                The Committee does not believe that the agency should
decision not to move into this difficult terrain, believing
                                                                be centralized in a single new location. This would
that a superficial verdict would do more harm than good,
                                                                involve a transition from the current arrangement, be
and that the field was best left to general assessments
                                                                disruptive for staff, and fail to capitalize on the full range
with a longer timeline such as the one now underway by
the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science        of opportunities for partnership in P/T and municipal
                                                                jurisdictions. We assume, moreover, that there will be
                                                                                                                                 o f




and Technology, chaired by Senator Michael Kirby.
At this point, we shall say only that the scoping exercise      some expansion of core functions in Ottawa, aligned
                                                                                                                                 R e n e w a l




for the new agency must be informed by a careful review
of public health service provision and health promotion
for First Nations and Inuit Canadians.


..........................................................................................                                 79
                  .................................................................................................

                  with the funding recommendations and national public           regional centre for infectious disease control. If a federal
                  health strategy (see below). But the agency must be seen       laboratory were to be developed as a specialized resource
                  to reach across Canada in tangible and visible ways.           and co-located, sharing of infrastructure and supplies
                                                                                 would make sense. These hubs would be ideal settings for
                  There accordingly exist two logical options. One is to         applied research, with both practitioners and academics
                  concentrate on specific locations for establishing or          involved in joint research programs. They would also be
                  expanding agency functions that reflect the current            excellent settings for various types of training programs.
                  geographical siting of PPHB. The other is to expand
                  judiciously some of the existing sites and deliberately        Last, some specialized federal resource centres may in
                  devolve some existing or new functions to new locations        themselves operate on a networked basis. While this
                  across Canada. In this latter vision, which the                reduces critical mass for regional hubs and F/P/T synergy,
                  Committee endorses, an explicit effort would be made to        the network approach may have other advantages.
                  delineate regional hubs (for example, in Vancouver,
                  Edmonton, Winnipeg, Toronto, Quebec City and Halifax)          The key, in all cases, is to avoid building an empire at
                  that could each offer a specialized national resource,         Tunney’s Pasture and create a new culture of outreach,
                  differentiated in support of the entire system (such as        partnership, and excellence. As regards partnerships, any
                  exists in Winnipeg with the National Microbiology              new agency must consult widely with stakeholders in the
                  Laboratory).                                                   broader health community, including the voluntary
                                                                                 sector and service provider associations and unions, to
                  In the next chapter, we outline our recommendation for         ensure that the energy and creativity of non-governmental
                  a national network of centres for infectious disease           organizations [NGOs] is usefully harnessed.
                  control, predicated on a provincial/regional hub system
                  as recommended by the Canadian Public Health                   4E.2 A National Public Health
                  Association, and building on strengths by involving P/T,            Advisory Board
                  academic, and possibly other partners. Even without
                  details about the network concept, one can imagine a           The Committee also envisages the prompt creation of a
                  fully developed system in which each regional centre has       National Public Health Advisory Board. This Board
                  two components, both bolstered by partnerships with            would advise the Chief Public Health Officer of Canada
                  local academic centres, the relevant municipal health          on the most effective means to create and implement a
                  agency, and other stakeholders:                                national public health strategy that reinforces pan-
                                                                                 Canadian collaboration so as to protect and enhance the
                  1. A regional centre focused on infectious disease             health of Canadians. The Board would be chaired by a
                     surveillance and outbreak management, with F/P/T            distinguished Canadian prominent in the health sphere;
                     funding, networked into a national steering committee,      its membership must reflect Canada’s geographic, cultural
                     and reporting to a director appointed under specific        and linguistic diversity, as well as the range of disciplines
                     P/T authority (either on a single jurisdictional or         and stakeholders in public health. International
                     multi-jurisdictional/regional basis). Federally-funded      representatives prominent in public health would be
                     personnel could work in the P/T regional centre             included on the Board.
                     (or elsewhere in municipal or provincial public health
                     agencies) as part of a system of strategic secondments      To maintain appropriate and clear lines of authority, the
                     within a national public health service.                    agency and its chief executive must report to the Minister;
                                                                                 the Board is therefore not a board of directors in the usual
                  2. A specialized federally-funded and administered
                                                                                 sense of corporate governance, but rather has an advisory
                     centre, serving as a national resource, led by a director
                                                                                 and strategic role. Nominations could be solicited from
S A R S




                     within the new federal agency, and reporting to the
                                                                                 existing F/P/T networks and advisory committees, as well
                     Chief Public Health Officer of Canada.
                                                                                 as key stakeholders in the health sphere. In order to
                                                                                 facilitate pan-Canadian collaboration and integration of
                  In the best of all worlds, activity in these regional hubs
                                                                                 public health functions with the broader health agenda,
f r o m




                  would become mutually reinforcing, with the emergence
                                                                                 one option would be to stipulate that Board nominees must
                  of a common culture dedicated to protecting the health
                                                                                 be vetted by the F/P/T Conference of Deputy Ministers of
                  of Canadians. Regional specialty centres within the new
                                                                                 Health. In any case, members would be appointed to
                  agency might supplement some of the technical support
                                                                                 limited terms by the federal Minister of Health, and the
L e a r n i n g




                  functions of P/T ministries. For example, public health
                                                                                 Minister could ask the Board for input on the performance
                  laboratory functions could logically be rolled into a P/T
                                                                                 of the Chief Public Health Officer of Canada.



                  80        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


4E.3 A National Public Health Strategy                           effectiveness and efficiency of public health. And these
                                                                 strategies, in turn, would integrate the efforts of federal,
As noted in Chapter 3, many countries have coherent              P/T, and other stakeholders.
strategies with nationally-agreed health goals. These
nations link legislation, programs, monitoring, standards,       The Committee views communications as an integral
funding and accountability to a national strategy and            part of a public health strategy, not a separate, stand-
objectives.                                                      alone item. The scope for public education is substantial
                                                                 in many areas of disease and health promotion. For
Canada currently lacks an overall strategic approach to          example, a national campaign—developed in partnership
the health field; this includes both public health and           with a number of stakeholders—could be launched to
health care. Several stakeholder groups, including the           enhance public awareness of the risks of various infectious
Canadian Nurses Association and the Canadian Public              diseases and encourage sensible new norms in behaviour,
Health Association, called for the creation of a national        e.g., more frequent hand washing, avoidance of work
health strategy. This theme also emerged strongly from           while in the contagious phase of a respiratory illness, use
focus groups with front-line hospital staff and their unions.    of surgical masks to prevent droplet transmission of viruses,
                                                                 and care during illness with a respiratory or enteric virus
Some provinces do have specific health goals. Sector             to prevent potential contamination of fomites (an inani-
strategies at the federal level also exist with varying          mate object that can carry disease-causing organisms) in
degrees of collaboration for foci such as healthy living,        the work or home environment. Increased engagement
cardiovascular disease, cancer and immunization. Further,        of key stakeholders in communicating with the public,
provinces drawing on federal transfers and their own             before and during infectious disease outbreaks offers new
revenue bases will want to set their own public health           opportunities to inform the public through additional,
priorities. However, the Committee sees overwhelming             innovative communications channels (i.e., employers,
merit in a collaborative process to integrate existing strate-   unions, and industry sectors directly implicated).
gies and forge an F/P/T consensus on goals. Canadian
citizens deserve a national health strategy that includes
specific health targets, benchmarks for progress towards         4F.      Funding to Strengthen
them, and collaborative mechanisms to maximize the pace                   Canadian Public Health
of progress. The Committee envisages a process whereby
public health professionals from different levels of govern-              Capacity
ment and from major stakeholder groups should confer
with a view to developing priorities, goals and strategies.
                                                                 4F.1     General Considerations




                                                                                                                                 C a n a d a
Public health professionals from Ottawa, the provinces,          Post-SARS, a rare consensus has emerged that more must
the territories, and various non-governmental partners           be spent on public health by the federal, provincial, and
must also pursue strategies to address the surveillance          territorial governments. Submissions and observers have
info- and infrastructure, and human resources, topics            provided suggested figures: all represent significant
reviewed in more detail in Chapters 5 and 7. New federal         increases over current levels of funding. Given the many
funding for public health should be explicitly tied to




                                                                                                                                 i n
                                                                 billions of dollars of extra funding per annum flowing to
these strategies and plans, with process and outcome             the acute care system as a result of two Health Accords,
reporting as in the Australian model, and be structured          we have no hesitation in suggesting that it is time to


                                                                                                                                 H e a l t h
as contributions that are subject to audit (see below).          redress the balance and invest an additional several
                                                                 hundred million dollars per annum in public health.
The national strategy should include provisions for a
coherent response across jurisdictions to outbreaks of           Although Health Canada’s own operations require
communicable disease. Infectious disease/public health           strengthening, this is not the only priority. New federal
                                                                                                                                 P u b l i c



emergency plans should be coordinated one with another           money must find its way to the front lines and to those
and tested in simulation. However, the strategy must not         activities which serve to strengthen the generic capacity
be limited to infectious diseases: the application of            of local and regional public health agencies to protect
increased resources and new structures should facilitate         and promote the health of Canadians. The Committee’s
the development and implementation of a broader                  expectation is that provinces and territories recognize—
                                                                                                                                 o f




national strategy to address causes of chronic diseases          indeed, will assert—their primary responsibility for those
and injuries. More research, more research synthesis and         same services, and also generously augment their
                                                                                                                                 R e n e w a l




better evaluation of health promotion and other programs         support.
are all necessary as part of any effort to enhance the



..........................................................................................                                 81
                  .................................................................................................

                  The health human resource shortfalls and urgent need to            by the program of grants and contributions to NGOs,
                  bolster public health agencies in some municipalities and          universities, and other partners that is currently operated
                  provinces make it essential that there be serious efforts in       by PPHB. (Enhancement of core activities would
                  good faith at F/P/T coordination. The worst-case scenario          naturally involve such partnerships; the issue here is the
                  would be one in which new funding served more to                   function and its incremental cost, not the mechanism.)
                  prompt bidding wars across jurisdictions and the movement          How do these estimates roll up?
                  of skilled public health personnel rather than building
                  new capacity.                                                      A proper national surveillance system alone could add
                                                                                     $40 million a year, assuming that costs are borne primarily
                  Obvious targets for early investment are surge capacity to         by the federal government. However, as outlined in the
                  deal with infectious outbreaks and other emergencies, a            next chapter, we are assuming that surveillance of infec-
                  major program to build human resources in public health,           tious diseases will be largely financed by the agency through
                  reinforcement of the public health laboratory network (see         a separate allocation. This estimate can thus be reduced
                  Chapter 6), and creation of business process agreements            substantially as regards core functions, assuming synergy
                  to facilitate coordinated F/P/T responses to outbreaks.            in infectious and non-infectious disease surveillance.
                  Immunizations, discussed in more detail below, are                 Let us peg this new cost crudely at $15 million per year
                  another target where money can be used quickly and                 on the grounds that infectious disease surveillance systems
                  well. The list could doubtless be extended in different            are a top priority in the present circumstances, and the
                  directions by different parties. Regardless, appropriate           P/T jurisdictions will themselves be co-investing in infec-
                  prudence in ramping-up federal funding is warranted to             tious disease surveillance. Development of the national
                  ensure that investments meet strategic goals and that              health strategy, creation of performance standards, and
                  new federal monies do not simply displace existing                 preparation of a report card to measure progress towards
                  public health commitments without much net gain.                   health goals could easily run $5 million a year. Enhancing
                                                                                     health emergency preparedness and response, outlined
                  4F.2     Funding the Core Agency Functions                         in more detail in Chapter 5, adds at least $10 million
                                                                                     per annum, rising by another $10 million if one considers
                  As we saw in Chapter 3, the FY 2003 appropriation for              the urgent need to create epidemic response teams and
                  the US CDC was C$10.8 billion (US$7.2 billion). Use of             other health emergency response teams to provide public
                  this US benchmark presupposes both a strengthened core             health and health services surge capacity. Defensible
                  function in a new federal agency and enhanced flow of              increases in spending to enhance infectious disease capacity
                  funds to support P/T programs, given CDC’s role in making          within the agency could run $50 million if the federal
                  diverse contributions to other levels of government. A direct      nodes in a new network for communicable disease
                  comparison with federal spending in Canada is difficult            control (see Chapter 5) are to be credible and supportive
                  given the fact that state and municipal public health              partners. This includes costs of creating or improving
                  infrastructure in the USA is arguably more uneven and              business processes for surveillance and outbreak manage-
                  the per capita expenditures at the local and regional level        ment, enhancement of federal laboratories, and some
                  generally lower than in Canada after one discounts spending        urgent capacity-building partnerships with provincial
                  on personal health services for recipients of social assistance.   laboratories until new F/P/T investments come on line.
                  Federal expenditures on public health in Canada in any             Investments in health human resources are urgently
                  case would need to increase several-fold to reach 1/10th           needed. The agency must play a lead role in building
                  of US expenditures suggested by the ratio of populations.          human resources for public health, including primary
                                                                                     training programs in partnership with colleges and
                  Another approach is to estimate the costs of strengthening         universities, scholarships and bursaries, secondments,
                  and supporting public health infrastructure in Canada              continuing education programs, and a greatly expanded
S A R S




                  and focus on core functions already in existence or those          field epidemiology service. This has been projected at
                  functions such as disease surveillance where a new agency          $25 million per annum. Health Canada’s internal invest-
                  might reasonably be expected to take on a leading role.            ment in public health research and evaluation is seriously
                  We have reviewed line-item estimates aimed at building a           inadequate, particularly if the new agency is to be a leader
f r o m




                  moderate level of infrastructure in the core agency over           in evidence-based public health practice or to partner
                  the long term, but these are rough estimates and the               effectively with the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
                  balance between lines would change over the years. These           [CIHR] and other research agencies provincially and in
                  estimates did not include amounts necessary to galvanize           the non-profit sector. Another $25 million could be
L e a r n i n g




                  capacity at the P/T level, and deliberately focused only           spent on R&D effectively in steady-state, particularly if
                  on “narrow-definition public health” as outlined in                the same monies go towards knowledge synthesis and
                  Chapter 3, i.e., excluding the type of activities supported


                  82         .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

guideline development. The coverage of areas such as          We make this recommendation in light of an urgent
environmental health, mental health, and injury               need to enhance federal public health capacity, recog-
prevention is clearly suboptimal and taken together,          nizing that it will go only a limited distance to narrowing
could draw an extra $30 million per annum.                    the major per capita spending gap when aligning similar
                                                              functions for Health Canada and USA’s CDC. We also
Not all funding needs to be new. We see opportunities         take note of the billions of dollars recently invested in
for public health to participate in programs already          personal health services, the staggering costs of the SARS
announced, such as the massive investment in the Canada       outbreak, and the fact that $200 million per annum is
Health Infoway, and perhaps even the 5-year $90 million       about equal to the annual operating budget of a single
fund for health human resources planning. But the tally       large community hospital. In the circumstances, it seems
above has already taken us to $170 million per annum in       minimally prudent to increase spending on core functions
new spending. Furthermore, this list assumes that there       over 3 to 5 years, reaching a target of an additional
are no new costs from institutional redesign, or new costs    $200 million per annum to ensure that Canada has an
imposed by legislative and regulatory reforms. It assumes     effective federal agency for public health protection
that Health Canada has already invested adequately in         and promotion.
the existing programs that address healthy human develop-
ment or chronic disease prevention and control. Both
deal with exceedingly important areas in the public
                                                              4G. A New Public Health
health portfolio—nothing less than, respectively, healthy         Partnership Program for
beginnings to the lives of future generations of Canadians,
and the great non-communicable scourges of our time
                                                                  Provinces and Territories
such as cardiovascular disease and cancer. The list also
                                                              4G.1 Level of Funding
assumes that if the scope of the new agency expands,
the activities that are transferred in require no increases   We have emphasized the need for funds to flow to the
in budgets.                                                   front lines where most outbreaks are contained and
                                                              where public health does most of its good daily work in
In the circumstances, we are recommending that the            preventing disease and protecting the health of Canadians.
federal government budget for increases in core functions     Ideally, to determine the necessary funding, analysts
of a new federal agency for public health that will rise,     would establish a reference level for required local and
over the next 3 to 5 years, to a target of $200 million       P/T programs and services based on a combination of
per annum in incremental funding beyond that already          expert consensus, established efficacy and cost-
spent in the “narrow” conceptualization of federal public     effectiveness/cost-benefit, and comparisons with other




                                                                                                                             C a n a d a
health functions set out in Chapter 3.                        countries. They would then establish the gap between
                                                              current reality and the reference level, and estimate the
How does this figure align with current spending? Recall      cost of closing that gap over a reasonable period of time.
from Chapter 3 that the core functions within PPHB            Such a process would be extremely time-consuming and
currently amount to $187 million per annum (2002              is beyond the mandate of the Committee.




                                                                                                                             i n
budget). Allocating a portion of extant grants and
contributions to this number, we reached $225 million as      As noted in Chapter 3, incremental funding to bring all
a rough estimate of core function costs in the Branch         provinces up to the spending level in British Columbia


                                                                                                                             H e a l t h
currently. We estimated, again crudely, that about $75        would require an additional $408 million annually.
million of the costs of operations in other branches of       However, the level of service in British Columbia cannot
Health Canada could be deemed to fall within this             be assumed to represent the ‘gold standard’ for public
“narrow” range of public health activities. If the agency     health service delivery. As is evident internationally with
were simply to roll these functions together, exclusive of    personal health services, the boundaries for justifiable
                                                                                                                             P u b l i c



vaccine costs, then it would spend about $300 million         spending on public health are highly elastic given different
per annum based on the 2002 budget. Thus, the                 community or societal tolerances for health risks and
proposed growth is about 60% over time to $500 million        disparities. A crude $400 million figure also does not
per annum for core functions. The growth becomes              consider the potential differences in delivery costs due to
smaller in relative terms if one assumes that the scope of    geographically-dispersed populations or differing propor-
                                                                                                                             o f




the agency broadens meaningfully.                             tions of higher needs populations (e.g., health status,
                                                              poverty, language, education, etc.), as well as the fixed
                                                                                                                             R e n e w a l




                                                              systems costs independent of population size.




..........................................................................................                             83
                  .................................................................................................

                  A second approach is to consider federal support for            should be earmarked for a new Public Health
                  personal health care. The 2003 Health Accord provides           Partnerships Program to strengthen general P/T public
                  $34.8 billion in additional funds for health care over a        health infrastructure. The logical question then
                  five-year period (2003-4 to 2007-8). If public health           becomes: How should the funds flow?
                  spending were pegged at not less than 3% of the personal
                  health services spending through public channels, at            4G.2 Programmatic Funding:
                  least $1 billion in new public health spending should                Some Constitutional and Legal
                  have been earmarked for public health over 5 years to
                  keep pace with new personal services spending. And
                                                                                       Considerations
                  since the goal is to redress the balance in some measure        The frustration with some of the jurisdictional issues in
                  and build greater F/P/T capacity, the new benchmark             public health spurred a small chorus of informants
                  would need to be well above $200 million per annum              suggesting that the federal government should enact new
                  for P/T transfers.                                              public health legislation to create national standards in
                                                                                  areas such as disease surveillance and notification.
                  Other estimates of necessary spending are similarly approxi-    Others called for the acceptance of tough new rules in
                  mate. We saw in Chapter 3 that the total spending on            exchange for new federal monies. The Committee
                  public health ranges from $2.0 billion to $2.7 billion,         supports the need to modernize the extant public health
                  depending on whether the definition is narrow or broad.         norms and legislation, and impose conditions on funding
                  The provincial spending, based on rough estimates and           as occurs in both the USA and Australia. However, federal
                  projections, is $1.72 billion, inclusive of vaccine costs.      spending power has both advantages and limitations.
                  If one assumed that over several years, there should on
                  average be a 50% increase in P/T/Municipal core activities,     The federal government can transfer funds to individuals,
                  the increased spending would amount to about $850               institutions (e.g., hospitals), and other levels of govern-
                  million per annum. One arbitrary point of reference is          ment (provinces, municipalities). All are legally free to
                  that the federal government should cover at least 50% of        accept or decline the grant or contribution. Federal funds
                  the increased P/T spending in its role as the primary revenue   can be unconditional or conditional. It is well-established
                  collector for Canada. This leaves half of $850 million or       that conditional transfers have had the effect of influ-
                  about $425 million as new and earmarked federal support.        encing provinces to alter their policy priorities (e.g., by
                  Provinces vary sharply in their ability to finance additional   making health insurance universal). A strengthened
                  public health spending; and the proportion of federal           infrastructure could therefore be created through the use
                  funding in the extant $1.72 billion fell between 1977 and       of transfers that make provincial compliance with
                  2000 until the first Health Accord began reversing a            national public health norms or rules a prerequisite for
                  trend to downloading of health costs onto P/T govern-           federal funding. However, the provinces must agree to
                  ments. Certainly it cannot be said that Ottawa is paying        the conditions. In theory, if federal spending conditions
                  50% of the existing P/T public health expenses. That            were seen as disguised attempts to regulate provincial
                  said, the Committee again takes note of more than               areas of jurisdiction, the courts might look favourably on
                  $30 billion in new federal monies to support provincial         a constitutional challenge. Moreover, the remedy in the
                  health spending vested in the second Health Accord.             event of provincial non-compliance with federal
                                                                                  conditions is political and financial, not legal.
                  We have therefore agreed that the total new federal contri-
                  bution to P/T (and therefore local/municipal) public            The Committee also heard suggestions from some
                  health funding can defensibly be set at $500 million per        informants that if the provinces did not cooperate with
                  annum. This assumes that P/T governments themselves             the development of a national infrastructure, the federal
                  will make a greater allocation to public health over the
S A R S




                                                                                  government should deal directly with municipalities and
                  next several years with the result that a much stronger         local health units, flowing federal funds to them in
                  F/P/T system will steadily emerge.                              exchange for complying with federal standards on
                                                                                  reportable diseases, timetables for reporting, etc. However,
                  In the next chapter we shall outline how $100 million           contractual obligations cannot bind third parties. A contract
f r o m




                  per annum of these new federal monies should be invested        between the federal government and a municipality
                  in infectious disease surveillance and outbreak manage-         would not bind providers who report information to
                  ment through P/T or regional structures. We also                local public health officials, and municipalities generally
                  recommend that $100 million per annum be used to                do not have the power to impose data standards on
L e a r n i n g




                  reinvigorate the National Immunization Strategy (see            providers outside the authority of the provincial public
                  below). However, not less than $300 million per annum           health branch. Furthermore, federal-municipal contracts



                  84        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

could not bind provincial public health officials and           In thinking about how new funds might flow, one sees at
institutions, and local public health officials are regulated   once that the Canada Health Act cannot practically be
by provincial statutes, which integrate them into               revised to include public health as an insured service.
provincial public health systems.                               The types of service are distinct, and the five current
                                                                principles of the Act are not germane to public health
A more useful tool that is better suited to the nature of       with its population focus.
Canadian federalism, and the culture of collaboration
that we believe must exist in public health, is the             New public health funding for P/T functions might be
Intergovernmental Agreement. These agreements are often         separately transferred to provinces and territories on an
structured as memoranda of understanding and are “soft”         otherwise unconditional basis for general public health
policy instruments. Although they are sometimes                 purposes. Even if there were somehow a set of indicators
drafted in legal language, they lack formal legal status.       to support the broad requirement that the money be
Memoranda of understanding [MOUs] between govern-               demonstrably directed to public health, this approach
ments are a form of intergovernmental agreement.                would do little to reduce disparities, augment coordination,
Intergovernmental agreements are a central feature of           initiate a national public health strategy, create national
Canadian cooperative federalism. These documents range          surge capacity, or promote more uniform approaches to
from the very general (e.g., the Social Union Framework         disease surveillance. It would also undermine Canada’s
Agreement [SUFA]) to the very detailed (which resemble          position with international agencies such as the World
contracts). The incentive to enter into these agreements        Health Organization that are increasingly looking to
is that they help to formalize and regularize relations         nation-states for disease prevention or control in this era
between levels of government. Should a dispute arise,           of globalization.
the terms of the agreement can be reviewed and conduct
assessed against them. At the extreme, intergovernmental        Another option would see tax points transferred to the
agreements could even require that certain provisions be        provinces and territories so that they gain greater fiscal
entrenched in provincial legislation, to make them legally      capacity to meet their public health needs. This has all
binding on provincial officials. The Supreme Court has          the disadvantages of the previous option, and because of
nonetheless stated that intergovernmental agreements do         differential P/T ability to generate tax revenues, also
not bind provincial or federal legislatures, which remain       augments disparities in per capita spending, as occurred
free to legislate in breach of intergovernmental agree-         with post-1977 personal health services spending.
ments or to roll back legislation passed to operationalize
an intergovernmental understanding. A number of                 Grants and contributions to local public health agencies,
federal-provincial MOUs are already in use in the public        universities, professional associations, NGOs and other




                                                                                                                               C a n a d a
health sector. Consistent with practice in Australia and        stakeholders might be provided to promote activities that
the USA, we see numerous areas in public health where           strengthen public health services. This will occur as part
MOUs could be concluded among F/P/T governments as              of the roll-out of many aspects of a new national strategy.
a precondition to the flow of federal funds.                    It may be particularly important for the federal govern-
                                                                ment to consider more direct liaison with public health
4G.3 Funding Instruments


                                                                                                                               i n
                                                                agencies in major municipalities such as Vancouver,
                                                                Edmonton, Calgary, Winnipeg, Toronto, or Montreal.
Currently, the Government of Canada transfers funds to          However, the first line of interaction should logically be


                                                                                                                               H e a l t h
provinces and territories as a contribution towards the         with the level of government that, constitutionally, has
provision of insured health services on condition that          primary responsibility for overseeing public health
they are provided according to the five principles laid out     services. In short, transfers to non-P/T stakeholders make
in the Canada Health Act. Provinces and territories fund        sense for specific activities (e.g., aspects of health human
the provision of these insured health services, as well as      resource development), ideally with the full knowledge
                                                                                                                               P u b l i c



other health services, including public health. In Ontario,     and support of P/T jurisdictions. (Because contributions
municipal governments are also responsible for contri-          are subject to full audit while grants are not, the
buting 50% to the cost of most public health services.          Committee urges use of contribution agreements for
Federal programs include the provision of advice and in-        transfers wherever possible.)
kind service for the prevention and control of infectious
                                                                                                                               o f




and non-communicable diseases, support for emergency
response, public health services for select First Nations
                                                                                                                               R e n e w a l




communities, and grants and contributions to NGOs as
outlined earlier.



..........................................................................................                               85
                  .................................................................................................

                  Another option suggested by some was general cost-             immunization strategy and an infectious diseases
                  sharing, e.g., the federal government would implement a        network would therefore not constrain province-specific
                  specific formula for sharing the cost of public health         flexibility. A province might balance out greater per
                  services with the provinces and territories. This option       capita participation for front-line public health in the
                  requires a clear definition of the services and programs to    new program with a lesser degree of participation in the
                  be cost-shared, and runs the risk of displacing, rather        federal funding for provincial infectious disease control.
                  than augmenting, spending. It would not address                The majoritarian provisions of SUFA also preclude
                  disparities, coordination or surge capacity.                   blocking of necessary national norms by one or two
                                                                                 provinces that have a smaller stake in one or the other
                  Two other related options are the public health capacity       funding stream.
                  foundation or a public health capacity fund. The first
                  involves transferring a lump sum to an arm’s-length            This option is used by the USA and Australia to improve
                  corporation which would disperse funds to public health        public health infrastructure. Its critical characteristic is
                  stakeholders. This would provide financial stability and       the ability to use funding as an instrument to direct
                  allow for non-partisan solutions to specific challenges        activities according to an agreed plan. Funding for
                  that are not policy issues. However, this option, similar      programs can be directed at, for example, information
                  to Infoway or the Canada Foundation for Innovation, has        systems, laboratory capacity, training, recruitment and
                  been criticized for a lack of accountability to Parliament,    retention, emergency response capacity, developing P/T
                  and has the disadvantage of failing to put public health on    and local strategies and plans, among others. The
                  a continuing and stable footing. A public health capacity      programmatic option might also be combined in part with
                  fund, similar to the Primary Health Care Transition Fund,      cost-sharing: some programs would offer a percentage of
                  would hinge on an F/P/T process to define public health        the cost, up to a maximum with the province or territory
                  programs to be funded. It would provide allocations to         finding the balance. This option most closely aligns
                  each P/T, and each jurisdiction would then use the funds       funding and policy direction, and reduces the risk of
                  to develop/maintain chosen activities within the overall       displacing existing spending.
                  program direction. This approach is more applicable to
                  developmental projects, especially for information infra-      We are therefore recommending the creation of a new
                  structure and human resources, than to continuous funding      $300 million Public Health Partnerships Program, modelled
                  of infrastructure. Furthermore, it requires advance agree-     on precedents set by the Commonwealth Government in
                  ment with all provinces and territories, yet the program       Australia and the US CDC. The Canadian Agency for
                  needs of different P/T jurisdictions are highly variable.      Public Health would flow these funds largely through
                                                                                 agreements with P/T public health officials, aimed at
                  Program funding, in contrast to all the foregoing              reinforcing core public health functions, collaborative
                  approaches, has one massive advantage. It avoids creating      arrangements, and local capacity for the full range of
                  another focal point for F/P/T tensions with a visible sum      contemporary public health activity.
                  of money. Program funding is unabashedly targeted to
                  the diverse needs of specific jurisdictions, but can simul-    4G.4 Current Program of Grants and
                  taneously reinforce an agreed national strategy. In essence,        Contributions
                  the Committee envisages an explicitly depoliticizing
                  strategy. We recommend placing the $300 million in the         Currently, more than half of PPHB’s budget is for grants
                  hands of the Canadian Agency for Public Health, and            and contributions [G&C], flowing mainly to NGOs across
                  allowing a series of programmatic and ad hoc negotia-          Canada. Inside this $200 million G&C envelope are
                  tions to unfold among F/P/T public health professionals        well-established programs covering a range of issues from
                  who have the health of Canadians, rather than the              communicable and non-communicable diseases to
S A R S




                  vicissitudes of re-election, as their immediate and ongoing    wellness and healthy living/aging. For example, among
                  priority. The transfers would be structured as contributions   the programs is one to support a joint Health Canada/CIHR
                  and therefore open to audit. As noted in Chapter 3, we         research initiative on Hepatitis C—a condition for which
                  also recommend that the funds be allocated according to        there is still no vaccine. Hepatitis C has infected an
f r o m




                  SUFA to avoid perverse incentives and penalties for early      estimated 240,000 to 300,000 Canadians. Thousands of
                  investments by P/Ts. A logical strategy would be to            those infected develop chronic disease that could lead to
                  manage the entire $500M in new public health transfers         death from cirrhosis or liver cancer. According to Prof.
                  as a single sum on this basis, providing greater flexibility   Mel Krajden, prior to the joint initiative there were only
L e a r n i n g




                  to both the federal agency and P/T public health leaders       three funded hepatitis C researchers and very limited
                  in setting priorities. The earmarking of funds for an          research occurring in Canada. The joint research



                  86        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

initiative has catalyzed a substantial expansion in             The Committee believes that the grants and contributions
Hepatitis C research across Canada, much of it inter-           programs directed at various NGOs are valuable policy
nationally competitive and already yielding results that        tools. The above-referenced concerns have more to do
can translate from bench to bedside. There is obvious           with management of the funds than the intrinsic worth
value in investments of this nature and in a great many         of the investment. However, these expenditures should
other G&C-supported activities.                                 be reviewed to ensure that they reinforce and comple-
                                                                ment the Public Health Partnerships Program, and
Nonetheless, the Committee has heard mixed reviews of           re-allocated if there are any issues about value-added
the existing G&C program, in part, we surmise, because          in relation to a new national health strategy.
spending on core functions has lagged and led to a sense
of non-proportionality in the magnitude of transfers to         4G.5 Reinvigorating a National
NGOs. Concerns about politicization of grants and                    Immunization Strategy
contributions were also raised, but we have no way of
testing the validity of this innuendo. We recognize that        The Committee’s assessment of the status of the National
many communities and community groups have bene-                Immunization Strategy offers another example of sound
fited from this investment, and that it has multiplier          proposals to invest in public health that have received
effects through the NGO sector that are meaningful.             uneven and inadequate support by various levels of
                                                                government. The Committee reviewed a series of docu-
In her September 2001 report, the Auditor General               ments dating back to the 1990s that show substantial
comments on the management of these programs.                   diversity in the publicly-funded program and legislation
Her team examined a sample of 38 projects from across           pertaining to immunization and vaccination. As one
Canada under three programs. The sample was selected            example, not all children in Canada have received two
because these projects covered the life course, were            doses of measles vaccine because some P/Ts could not
administered nationally and regionally, used sizable            afford to institute ‘catch-up’ programs in 1996-1997.
amounts of funds, and involved both grants and contri-          Although the benefits of adolescent hepatitis B immu-
bution agreements. Her report stated: “We are concerned         nization were recognized a decade ago, Canada took
about the significant number of our project reviews that        seven years to reach national coverage because of
identified problems in the project management process.          variable uptake across P/T jurisdictions.
In particular, we noted that the Branch did not subject
high-value projects to a rigorous selection process, nor        A proposal to strengthen collaboration on immunization
did it monitor those projects adequately…” In one of            was first presented to the F/P/T Conference of Deputy
the program portfolios, the Auditor General noted that          Ministers of Health in June, 1999. It was based on various




                                                                                                                               C a n a d a
the Branch had identified problems with two of the              concerns related to immunization in Canada, including
projects, “but had failed to take timely action to resolve      escalating vaccine prices, concerns about security of
them... In the eight national and regional files on projects    supply, safety issues with some vaccines, evidence for
under $2 million, we found five cases that were not             growing inequity in access to newer vaccines, and uneven
subjected to an adequate selection process and yet the          electronic recording of immunizations. Thereafter, a
                                                                highly collaborative F/P/T process led to a proposal for a




                                                                                                                               i n
Branch recommended them for approval...” In another
program, the Auditor General found that six of the national     National Immunization Strategy. Those involved have
projects were not eligible for funding based on the program’s   not been able to achieve support for the vision of a


                                                                                                                               H e a l t h
own guidelines: “Further, there was no evidence of              fully-funded strategy, in which resources to purchase
communication with interested parties to invite project         vaccines and secure their delivery would be guaranteed
proposals; nor was there evidence of internal or external       from coast to coast.
review or consultation with advisors. Yet all six of these
projects were recommended and approved for funding”             At present, provinces and territories remain responsible for
                                                                                                                               P u b l i c



(totalling $15 million). Amendments to agreements are a         finding the money to buy vaccines and deliver programs.
further problem in that they are not subject to the same        This system continues to be criticized by expert infor-
selection process as new agreements, and can be used to         mants and stakeholders alike. We understand that some
bypass selection and approval processes.                        suppliers offer provinces a package deal including various
                                                                perquisites for health promotion. The current system
                                                                                                                               o f




                                                                compromises purchasing power, limits the security of
                                                                vaccine supply, and puts providers in the untenable position
                                                                                                                               R e n e w a l




                                                                of having to recommend vaccines to persons/families
                                                                who often cannot afford them.


..........................................................................................                              87
                  .................................................................................................

                  New vaccines are adding to the problem. Four new               for the introduction of new vaccines. Absent such
                  vaccines are currently unfunded in most P/Ts—conjugate         consolidation, P/Ts have actually ended up competing
                  pneumococcal vaccine, conjugate meningococcal vaccine,         with each other for available supply and on price as
                  varicella vaccine and acellular pertussis vaccine. The         occurred with meningococcal vaccine shortages during
                  estimated bill for Canada was expected to mount fairly         outbreaks.
                  rapidly to a steady-state of about $200 million per year for
                  these new vaccines alone. Immunization experts from            Also, in the absence of immunization registries in most
                  federal, provincial, and territorial jurisdictions proposed    jurisdictions, Canada is not in a position to provide
                  that the federal government pay for the new vaccines           reliable and accurate information on coverage levels.
                  while P/Ts cover the costs of administration. To support       Our best information is that coverage with older vaccines,
                  their case, those involved produced documentation              fortunately, is adequate. Thus, the focus of $100 million
                  showing meaningful health and economic benefits from           in incremental federal funding can be on new vaccines as
                  more complete coverage and upgrading of vaccination            well as improving the information systems to ensure that
                  strategies. However, the F/P/T focus was instead on            Canada meets an articulated health goal (and inter-
                  adding money to personal health services through the           national norms) as regards vaccination coverage.
                  Health Accord.

                  The 2003 federal Budget acknowledged that immunization
                                                                                 4H. Recommendations
                  has been a remarkably effective preventive health measure.     The Committee recommends that:
                  However, it provided only $45 million over five years
                  ($5 million in year one, and $10 million a year thereafter)    4.1 The Government of Canada should move
                  “to assist in the pursuit of a national immunization               promptly to establish a Canadian Agency for
                  strategy.” The Budget document claimed that the “objective         Public Health, a legislated service agency, and
                  of the strategy will be to ensure equitable and timely             give it the appropriate and consolidated
                  access to recommended vaccines for all Canadians in order          authorities necessary to provide leadership and
                  to reduce the incidence of specific vaccine-preventable            action on public health matters, such as national
                  diseases.” It further claimed that the national strategy           disease outbreaks and emergencies, with or
                  would result in: “improved safety and effectiveness of             without additional authorities regarding
                  vaccines; enhanced coordination and efficiency of immu-            national disease surveillance capacity.
                  nization procurement; and better information on
                  immunization coverage rates within Canada.” In fact,           4.2 The Government of Canada should ensure that
                  notwithstanding this lofty objective and these anticipated         the scope of the Agency’s mandate covers public
                  results, the financial support in the 2003 Budget is               health broadly with appropriate linkages to
                  nowhere near sufficient to catalyze a national                     other government departments and agencies
                  immunization strategy.                                             engaged in public health activities. The
                                                                                     Government’s scoping exercise for the new
                  The Committee believes that not less than $100 million             Agency must be informed by a careful review
                  per annum should be earmarked for a major reinvigoration           of public health service provision and health
                  of the National Immunization Strategy under the                    promotion for First Nations and Inuit
                  auspices of the new Canadian Agency for Public Health.             Canadians.
                  Earmarked funds could be transferred to a purchasing           4.3 The Government of Canada should budget for
                  body, e.g., Public Works and Government Services Canada,           increases in core functions of the new
                  to purchase vaccines as agreed under the renewed strategy,         Canadian Agency for Public Health that will
                  so as to meet provincial and territorial needs. This would
S A R S




                                                                                     rise, over the next 3 to 5 years, to a target of
                  ensure that the funds go only for the agreed-upon vaccines,        $200 million per annum in incremental
                  consolidates purchasing power and facilitates price reduc-         funding beyond that already spent on core
                  tions, and sets annual and national target volumes to              federal public health functions.
                  ensure that industry can meet the needs of the nation.
f r o m




                  Furthermore, other branches of Government, such as             4.4 The architects of the new Canadian Agency for
                  Industry Canada, could use the vaccine investment to               Public Health should ensure that its structure
                  leverage private sector investment in vaccine research and         follows a hub and spoke model whereby links
                  development, as well as production in Canada. Working              are made to existing regional centres with
L e a r n i n g




                  from an F/P/T consensus enhances inter-jurisdictional              particular strengths in public health specializ-
                  equity, by creating a “minimum agreed upon standard”               ations while some other functions and new



                  88        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

    ones are devolved to other regions of the           4.9 The Government of Canada should incorporate
    country, with a vision that these parts support         into the new Agency the current grants and
    the entire system.                                      contributions programs of the Population and
                                                            Public Health Branch of Health Canada. These
4.5 The Government of Canada should create the
                                                            grants and contributions should be reviewed
    position of Chief Public Health Officer of
                                                            and their uses aligned with the National Public
    Canada. The Canadian Agency for Public
                                                            Health Strategy and made complementary to
    Health should be headed by the Chief Public
                                                            the Public Health Partnerships Program.
    Health Officer of Canada who would report
    directly to the federal Minister of Health and      4.10 Through the Canadian Agency for Public
    serve as the leading national voice for public           Health, the Government of Canada should
    health, particularly in outbreaks and other              invest $100 million/annum within 12 to 18
    health emergencies.                                      months to realize the National Immunization
                                                             Strategy whereby the federal government
4.6 The Government of Canada should create the
                                                             would purchase agreed-upon new vaccines to
    National Public Health Advisory Board, and
                                                             meet provincial and territorial needs and
    ensure that nominations of board members come
                                                             support a consolidated information system to
    forward through provincial and territorial as
                                                             track vaccinations and immunization
    well as federal channels. The mandate of the
                                                             coverage.
    Board will be to advise the Chief Public Health
    Officer of Canada on the development and
    implementation of a truly pan-Canadian
    public health strategy.
4.7 The Canadian Agency for Public Health should
    play a catalytic role in developing a National
    Public Health Strategy in collaboration with
    provincial and territorial governments and in
    consultation with a full range of non-govern-
    mental stakeholders. The new Strategy should
    delineate priorities and goals for key categories
    of public health activity along with provisions
    for public reporting across jurisdictions of




                                                                                                              C a n a d a
    progress towards achieving goals.
4.8 The Government of Canada should fund a new
    Public Health Partnerships Program under the
    auspices of the Canadian Agency for Public
    Health. The Agency would thereby provide




                                                                                                              i n
    program funding to provinces and territories to
    strengthen their public health programming
    in agreed areas and in support of the National


                                                                                                              H e a l t h
    Public Health Strategy. The funding for the
    Public Health Partnerships Program should
    rise over 2-3 years to $300 million/annum.
                                                                                                              P u b l i c
                                                                                                              o f
                                                                                                              R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................              89
                  .................................................................................................


                  Appendix 4.1
                  Population and Public Health Branch:
                  Current Organization Chart


                                           Assistant Deputy
                                               Minister

                         Senior Director General
                                                           Business Integration and
                                                       Information Services Directorate
                           Centre for Healthy
                          Human Development
                                                        Centre for Chronic Disease
                                                         Prevention and Control
                       Centre for Infectious Disease
                         Prevention and Control
                                                          Centre for Surveillance
                                                               Coordination
                          Centre for Emergency
                       Preparedness and Response
                                                        Strategic Policy Directorate
                            Management and
                            Program Services
                                                         Laboratory for Foodborne
                                                            Zoonoses (Guelph)
                          National Microbiology
                          Laboratory (Winnipeg)
S A R S
f r o m
L e a r n i n g




                  90         .........................................................................................
                                SARS and Public Health
Chapter 5


BUILDING CAPACITY AND COORDINATION:
National Infectious Disease Surveillance, Outbreak
Management, and Emergency Response
.................................................................................................



Public Health is charged with protecting the health of a          need to clarify, and where necessary improve, the
particular population. Among other activities, this               interaction of health emergency activity, specifically
requires surveillance functions, the capacity to lead the         public health emergencies such as disease outbreaks, and
fight against specific disease outbreaks, and the ability to      broader emergency preparedness and response.
participate effectively in a multi-modal response to major
health emergencies. Out of surveillance flows the ability         Fourth and finally, we outline how new transfers by the
to issue alerts about health threats to public health             Canadian Agency for Public Health could reinforce the
practitioners, clinicians, health care facilities, governments,   nation’s second line of defence against infectious outbreaks
and the general public. Effective surveillance, coupled to        by strengthening provincial and territorial capacity for
first-line outbreak management, can prevent the spread            communicable disease surveillance, epidemic response,
of an infectious disease and its escalation into a full-          and related activities in nosocomial infection control.
blown health emergency.                                           This program of transfers would also seek to link these
                                                                  P/T activities with relevant federal centres to create a
Because first-line outbreak response occurs at the local or       seamless national network for detecting and managing
regional level, the general renewal of public health              emerging and existing infectious threats to public health.
infrastructure will pay dividends in better preparedness          Some federal funding and concerted action to ensure
for ‘the next SARS’. Our brief overview of SARS in                national preparedness should begin as soon as possible




                                                                                                                                 C a n a d a
Canada also has raised issues about the capacity and              given the forthcoming winter season of upper and lower
interplay of P/T and federal level responses to disease           respiratory diseases. In the medium-term, the network
outbreaks, and the interface between outbreak manage-             must be harmonized with the other elements of a national
ment and broader emergency responses. Accordingly,                public health strategy, including the Public Health
this chapter draws together several threads.                      Partnerships Program and funding to realize the National




                                                                                                                                 i n
                                                                  Immunization Strategy outlined in the previous chapter.
First, we briefly introduce some of the elements of
surveillance and outbreak management. Our overview
                                                                  5A. Surveillance and Outbreak
                                                                                                                                 H e a l t h
of the basics of outbreak management is cross-walked
directly to the SARS experience, providing a framework                Management: Essential
to revisit the chronology from Chapter 2.
                                                                      Functions for Public Health
Second, we review the 1999 and 2002 reports of the
                                                                  5A.1 Surveillance
                                                                                                                                 P u b l i c



Auditor General on issues of infectious disease surveillance
and outbreak management. These reports are prescient              Experts have written lengthy chapters on the nature of
in the light of the events surrounding SARS.                      surveillance functions in an ideal public health system.
                                                                  This report is not the place to repeat those details, but a
Third, we turn to the broader issue of health emergencies.        brief introduction to this oft-misunderstood field is
                                                                                                                                 o f




Here, there appears to be some progress in F/P/T collabo-         needed.
ration, triggered in part by the terrorist attacks in the
                                                                                                                                 R e n e w a l




USA on and after September 11, 2001 and recognition of
the global challenge of bioterrorism. We highlight the


..........................................................................................                                 91
                  .................................................................................................

                  Health Surveillance may be defined as the tracking and            • Clinical. For many surveillance purposes, this is the
                  forecasting of any health event or health determinant               ideal source. Indeed, new diseases and emerging
                  through the continuous collection of high-quality data,             clusters of known diseases are often first suspected by
                  the integration, analysis and interpretation of those data          astute clinicians who observe unusual patterns of
                  into surveillance products (for example reports, advisories,        illness, and work with others to initiate more systematic
                  alerts, and warnings), and the dissemination of those               surveillance. Optimum efficiency in clinical surveil-
                  surveillance products to those who need to know.                    lance can only be achieved if the clinical data are
                  Surveillance products are produced for a specific public            accessible electronically. This is rarely the case at
                  health purpose or policy objective.                                 present. The Electronic Health Record has the
                                                                                      potential to be a rich source of surveillance data in
                  Surveillance should be purposeful, economical, and action-          future. Moreover, as submissions to the Committee
                  oriented. It should not only detect emerging health risks,          have pointed out, clinical data for surveillance need to
                  but include systems that allow public health officials to           be assembled from a range of providers and facilities,
                  monitor and evaluate progress in health protection and              including family physicians and other primary care
                  disease prevention. New health risks such as bioterrorism           providers, emergency departments, pharmacists, and
                  and zoonoses, re-emergence of some diseases (e.g., multi-           veterinarians.
                  resistant bacteria), and globalization have fundamentally
                  altered the scope and response time expected of                   We alluded in Chapter 2 to the Global Public Health
                  surveillance programs at every level.                             Intelligence Network [GPHIN]. While the two functions
                                                                                    overlap, it is worthwhile to clarify the difference between
                  Surveillance uses whatever data sources will provide the          surveillance and intelligence. Surveillance involves
                  necessary information. Surveillance systems may share             collection and aggregation of data before they are inter-
                  data with personal health services information systems,           preted. In the case of intelligence, the sources of infor-
                  but the end-products are different. Most of the data              mation have already been analyzed and interpreted
                  currently available from health facilities are originally         (usually informally). Thus, an emergency physician may
                  generated for administrative purposes. They can serve             notice an unusually large number of cases of bloody
                  as raw material for health services management and                diarrhoea and inform the local medical officer of health
                  research, as well as for disease and health surveillance if       [MOH], or an MOH may post a report of an outbreak of
                  procedures for capturing and handling administrative              flu-like illness with rash on an electronic bulletin board,
                  data are appropriately adapted.                                   or the GPHIN may detect news reports on influenza in
                                                                                    Asia. The importance of intelligence is that it can alert
                  In general, surveillance data can originate from any of           authorities to look for similar cases in their own
                  four classes of source:                                           jurisdiction.

                  • Special purpose, i.e., data collected specifically for a        Public health is still struggling to catch up to the potential
                    particular surveillance need. Special purpose data              for effective surveillance afforded by new technologies.
                    sources select the most relevant data and facilitate            The problems have been not only the cost of implementing
                    detection and response, but are costly to operate and           these systems (see Appendix 5.1 for the costing of a
                    may be difficult to maintain over the long term.                surveillance system), but also the very slow progress in
                                                                                    gaining consensus across jurisdictions (as will be outlined
                  • Surveys. Usually collected for more general health
                                                                                    below) and across programs on the architecture and
                    surveillance purposes, survey data differ from other
                                                                                    standards. Grappling with recent demands placed upon
                    special purpose data sets in that they are usually cross-
                                                                                    the design of systems by privacy legislation has also been
                    sectional or ‘one-off’ and may be useful for multiple
                                                                                    a serious challenge—one which we address in Chapter 9.
S A R S




                    surveillance functions, notwithstanding their lack of
                                                                                    As the Council of Chief Medical Officers of Health noted
                    specificity.
                                                                                    in their submission to the Committee, progress has been
                  • Administrative. As noted, data collected for admin-             too slow, and “stovepipe” systems persist everywhere.
                    istrative purposes often find a secondary purpose in
f r o m




                    disease surveillance, e.g., analysis of the diagnostic fields
                    on hospital discharge abstracts looking for geographic
                    clusters of a particular disease. Administrative data are
                    generally lower quality, and may not always be available
L e a r n i n g




                    on a timely basis, but are convenient to acquire and
                    inexpensive.



                  92        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


5A.2 Outbreak Management and                                      Detection demands the timely upward reporting of data
                                                                  through the public health hierarchy—local, regional,
     Investigation
                                                                  provincial, national, global—and the collation and
Outbreaks or epidemics are the occurrence of a disease in         analysis of case data at the lowest level where a cluster of
excess of its expected frequency. Outbreak investigations         cases can be recognized. As a leading industrialized nation,
are a type of fast-paced epidemiologic research, under-           Canada should be operating an exemplary surveillance
taken to determine the cause of the outbreak and what             system for new and known infectious diseases. Currently,
remedial actions are required. These investigations are           it does not.
typically retrospective, occur in real time often under
intense public and political pressure, begin without              On occasion, cases may be scattered widely so that an
hypotheses, are iterative, and are closely tied to the imple-     outbreak is not detectable at the local or even provincial
mentation of public health measures to contain the                level. For example, Health Canada occasionally
outbreak. Outbreak investigations also involve consider-          aggregates data showing a cluster of disease and notifies a
able challenges in communication, including essential             province or provinces about an unrecognized epidemic of
risk communication to the public.                                 a foodborne illness. Obviously the success of these systems
                                                                  is critically dependent on timely and accurate information
Foodborne epidemics are commonly multi-jurisdictional             flows across jurisdictions, along with data management
because of the wide distribution of foodstuffs from a             and analytic capacity at the appropriate levels. A smoothly-
single source. They often require national or international       functioning laboratory network is also essential to ensure
action. However, the investigation and management of              that case characterization occurs in a timely fashion.
infectious disease outbreaks is typically local and provincial,
at least in the first instance. Other levels of government        Once an epidemic is recognized in one country, this
may assist, and the epidemic may even be managed by               intelligence can forewarn public health officials in other
national or international bodies, but as a general rule, the      countries. Health Canada publishes the Canada
first line of defence is local. The SARS situation is thus in     Communicable Diseases Report every two weeks; its distri-
many ways a unique national and international experience,         bution is primarily in electronic format. At the global
a sign-post for actual and virtual globalization. Never has       level, there are several alert mechanisms. The GPHIN,
a worldwide outbreak emerged so quickly, been so widely           developed by Health Canada’s Centre for Emergency
covered by the global media, or sparked such interaction          Preparedness and Response and now used by the World
among different governments and international agencies.           Health Organization [WHO], scans media reports from
And never has a hitherto-unknown agent been investi-              around the world on the Internet. This information is fed
gated so quickly.                                                 into the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network




                                                                                                                                   C a n a d a
                                                                  [GOARN], which notifies countries about the activity and
Again, readers can find textbooks devoted to these issues.        catalyzes investigations. ProMed is an Internet alert system
In brief, outbreak management involves numerous steps,            with a wide subscription base among infectious disease
starting with epidemic detection and alert. Recog-                and public health practitioners. Individual clinicians and
nition of a new threat has different permutations and             public health officials post unusual occurrences of infectious
challenges, depending upon whether the agent is known




                                                                                                                                   i n
                                                                  disease on ProMed. It constitutes an informal and often
or unknown, whether the known agent is a notifiable or            useful back-up system to more official channels.
non-notifiable disease, and the extent of knowledge


                                                                                                                                   H e a l t h
about how to contain the agent most effectively and               We saw in Chapter 2 that an early opportunity to detect
efficiently. The special challenge in SARS was that the           SARS in China was missed by Health Canada and WHO
agent was new, its mode of transmission was initially             when a GPHIN report in November was not fully translated.
unclear (e.g., droplet or airborne), and aspects of its           However, by February, with an apparent outbreak of avian
infectivity (e.g., ability to survive on inanimate objects        flu in Hong Kong and an unusual respiratory outbreak in
                                                                                                                                   P u b l i c



or ‘fomites’ for many hours) only emerged during the              Guangdong, WHO put member countries on the alert.
course of the outbreak.                                           WHO and Health Canada alerts were picked up by the
                                                                  British Columbia Centre for Disease Control [BC CDC];
                                                                  the BC CDC’s dissemination of that information was
                                                                  probably responsible for the prompt isolation of the first
                                                                                                                                   o f




                                                                  SARS case in Vancouver. Alerts were also issued by local
                                                                  and provincial public health officials in Ontario, but
                                                                                                                                   R e n e w a l




                                                                  uptake was apparently inconsistent. In any event, the




..........................................................................................                                  93
                  .................................................................................................

                  spread of the outbreak at The Scarborough Hospital,            control’ responses. This was one of the major lessons
                  Grace Division was difficult to prevent given that the         learned from the CDC experience with anthrax. It
                  index patient’s son arrived in the emergency department        underscores why a federal agency is necessary but not
                  with SARS and without a travel history.                        sufficient for improved responsiveness in Canada.

                  As recognition of a new disease emerged in Vietnam and         The collective activity in epidemic investigation during
                  Hong Kong, WHO sent out further alerts specific to SARS        the SARS outbreak in Toronto was embarrassingly meagre.
                  on March 12, 2003. In Canada, WHO alerts triggered an          As we have seen, no shared database was established; juris-
                  immediate cascade of domestic alerts. While all this was       dictions squabbled over data flow; clinicians and public
                  done promptly, SARS had already been in Canada for             health physicians were unable to collaborate effectively
                  almost three weeks and the outbreak was taking flight in       on investigation and research; Health Canada’s responses
                  Toronto. A more effective Canadian alert system—               were well-intentioned but the federal government’s role
                  involving both the ability to reach all levels of the health   was unclear and its capacity limited as compared to the
                  care system and an uptake/response capacity in the             US CDC; the provincial public health laboratory was
                  system—is absolutely necessary for the future.                 overwhelmed; and the provincial public health branch
                                                                                 was not able to coordinate a response to an outbreak that
                  Rapid epidemiologic assessment is essential at the             involved four distinct local health units or take a leadership
                  beginning of an outbreak or epidemic to define the scope       role in epidemic investigation. For data management
                  of the problem and start mobilization of containment           Health Canada’s web-enabled Public Health Information
                  strategies. In Canada at the national level, the Pandemic      System [ i-PHIS] was eventually put into service by the
                  Influenza Committee was already in place, and it was           provincial public health branch, but not by local public
                  transmogrified into the basis for the daily F/P/T SARS         health units as it does not yet contain contact tracing and
                  conference call. These calls served a useful purpose           quarantine management modules. Local agencies instead
                  according to many informants, but most participants on         used systems built during the outbreak by each unit.
                  the calls were not directly involved in fighting the
                  outbreak. Moreover, those on the front-lines were              Establishing a case definition is central to disease
                  overwhelmed by constant demands to give and get                surveillance and outbreak containment. The Committee
                  information by teleconference. Again, we see that              has been advised that WHO developed its case definition
                  Canada lacked back-up capacity—the ‘B-team’ functions          to emphasize epidemiologic links because SARS, clinically,
                  that the CDC mobilizes in an outbreak. If nothing else,        resembled so many other forms of atypical community-
                  one might have expected rapid assessment to yield a            acquired pneumonia. As clinical and epidemiologic
                  focus on the epidemic curve for SARS with its positive         characterization of SARS continued and laboratory serology
                  messages, rather than the cumulative case counts that          became available, case definitions did evolve both at WHO
                  contributed to a sense of crisis.                              and elsewhere. In Canada, there were several changes
                                                                                 throughout the epidemic in the case definition achieved
                  The next step is epidemic investigation to identify the        by consensus on F/P/T conference calls, but again, this
                  etiology and the modes of transmission of an infectious        was not a straightforward exercise (see Appendix 5.2).
                  agent, thereby guiding appropriate measures to prevent
                  further transmission. An ongoing outbreak is generally a       The first case definition from Health Canada demanded
                  health emergency. Approaches to its investigation require      close contact with a suspect or probable SARS case for an
                  different modes of operation, different command-and-           epidemiologic link to be established. On March 31, 2003,
                  control structures and unified leadership. Investigators       the definition was revised to include “recent travel to a
                  should be insulated from the constant demands of data          defined setting that is associated with a cluster of SARS
                  flow. This did not happen with SARS in Canada. As one          cases.” This was added to capture exposure to sites within
S A R S




                  participant put it, “The continuous requests for infor-        Canada, particularly in Toronto where transmission of
                  mation on a minute-by-minute basis, day and night—             SARS had occurred in health care settings. The term
                  locally, provincially, and federally—hampered the efforts      ‘travel’, however, may have added to uncertainty about
                  of a limited number of overworked staff to get on with         whether the definition was meant to apply to residents
f r o m




                  the job of collecting, analyzing, interpreting and dissemi-    of SARS-affected areas. Ontario, moreover, had its own
                  nating the epidemiologic information required to control       case definition (included in Appendix 5.2) that specified
                  this disease.” Bureaucratically-structured organizations       the need for an epidemiologic link consisting of “close
                  are not well suited to responding to an epidemic and           contact” with a probable or suspect case. Other revisions
L e a r n i n g




                  their structures need to be modified for them to respond       to the Ontario definition were made on April 29, but the
                  effectively to the exigencies of rapid ‘command-and-           requirement for “close contact” was not changed.



                  94        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

On May 26, 2003, Ontario amended its definition after            Establishing an etiology is usually straightforward for
the emergence of the second wave of SARS to include              known agents, provided the requisite logistical arrange-
“recent travel or visit within 10 days of onset of symptoms      ments and laboratory capacity are in place. Scientists in
to a defined setting that is associated with a cluster of        Vancouver and Winnipeg were among the leaders inter-
SARS AND no other known cause of current illness.” As            nationally in sequencing the SARS coronavirus, which in
part of a general revision on May 29, 2003, Health Canada        turn facilitated the development of serological tests for
also amended its definition to make it clear that even a         SARS. Remarkable work was also done by laboratory
visit to a hospital with a SARS unit or other “identified        workers in various institutions in Toronto to establish
setting in Canada where exposure to SARS may have                diagnostic capacity for the coronavirus, supporting
occurred” should be considered sufficient link (again see        clinicians on the front-lines and facilitating public health
Appendix 5.2 for details).                                       containment efforts. Unfortunately, as hospital labora-
                                                                 tories stepped forward to take on responsibility for testing
This inter-jurisdictional confusion, including Health            for the SARS coronavirus, the ability to monitor data at
Canada’s belated recognition of the differences in defini-       the national and even provincial level was undercut
tions, and Ontario’s decision to post its own more specific      because of poor information systems and the lack of data-
definition, may have contributed to non-recognition of           sharing protocols. Epidemiologic and laboratory data
clusters of potential SARS in Ontario, as public health          became even more disintegrated, compromising epidemic
assessors focused on demonstrating epidemiologic links.          investigation efforts.
That said, clinicians would use their own best judgement
regardless of any case definition, and the Ontario definition    Confirmation of cases presupposes the existence of a
has also been defended as a necessity to contain the             definitive test to ascertain true cases. When the agent is
number of persons who would have to be investigated.             unknown, as was true for SARS, this takes some time.
                                                                 More definitive testing was possible only towards the end
On March 17, 2003, Health Canada, mirroring WHO,                 of SARS I, with acquisition of the capability to detect the
added an exclusion criterion. SARS was excluded if another       genetic fingerprint of the coronavirus from nasopharyngeal
etiology was defined for a case that otherwise met the           swabs, sputa, or stool, and during SARS II when serological
case definition. This tended to preclude the possibility         tests for SARS became available.
that an individual might be infected with more than
one agent, or that other non-infectious conditions               Along with confirming apparent cases, the outbreak
(e.g., congestive heart failure or post-operative atelectasis)   management and investigation team must find cases
might co-exist with SARS (as was likely true on 4 West in        and define the scope of the problem. SARS was a
North York General Hospital). On May 29, after the               huge challenge in this regard, because of the lack of any




                                                                                                                                  C a n a d a
North York cluster, the definition was revised to specify        screening test, the similarity of the symptoms to other
that the alternative cause must “fully explain” the              infections, and the lack of rapid confirmatory tests.
clinical presentation.                                           Enhanced surveillance for the illness is particularly critical
                                                                 at precisely that point when it appears that progress
The other key change on May 29, 2003 was that the                towards containing the outbreak has been made. We have




                                                                                                                                  i n
probable case definition now included a “suspect case            seen already that Canada’s local responses were deficient
with radiographic evidence of infiltrates consistent with        in these respects. Part of the detection imperative also
pneumonia or respiratory distress syndrome on chest              involved measures to find potential imported and exported


                                                                                                                                  H e a l t h
x-ray.” This clarification was welcomed by Toronto               cases of SARS. Health Canada was pushed internationally
clinicians, who had been frustrated with the insufficient        and nationally to implement expensive and cumbersome
weight given to radiological evidence.                           airline passenger screening procedures. We return to this
                                                                 issue in Chapter 11.
The continued variation in case definition had international
                                                                                                                                  P u b l i c



implications. Differences in case definitions around the         As data accumulate during the outbreak, the investigative
world led to occasional misclassification of individuals         team should be immediately generating descriptive
who had visited Toronto, and later developed what was            epidemiologic information, as well as generating and
clearly not SARS, as exported probable or suspect cases          testing hypotheses. For example, this step could have
of SARS. And in something of a reductio ad absurdum,             helped to pin down more rapidly the incubation period
                                                                                                                                  o f




US authorities took transit through the Toronto Airport          of SARS and attack rates in different subgroups. An
(in Peel Region) as constituting a visit to Toronto for          investigative team normally uses case-control, cohort,
                                                                                                                                  R e n e w a l




purposes of assessing exposure to a SARS-affected area.          and experimental studies to test hypotheses about the
                                                                 causative agent, its modes of transmission and possible


..........................................................................................                                 95
                  .................................................................................................

                  interventions to contain it. Because of poor coordination,       had staggering costs. SARS led to direct costs through
                  lack of standardized data collection, and substandard            public health and health care measures necessary to
                  data management and analysis capacity, we are only               contain the outbreak and treat those affected. Indirect
                  reaching this stage now that the Canadian outbreak has           costs were incurred as a result of: lost productivity from
                  receded. Many valuable opportunities were lost, and              illness, quarantine, self-isolation, and related workflow
                  Canada’s research productivity suffered as suggested in          disruption; payments to health care facilities and physicians
                  Chapter 2.                                                       in lieu of ordinary throughput-related revenues that were
                                                                                   interrupted by SARS; salary and other compensation for
                  Reporting of findings of epidemiologic investigations            those who were quarantined or otherwise unable to carry
                  to national and international bodies is a critical part          on their normal duties of employment as a result of SARS;
                  of an outbreak investigation for several reasons. Under-         and service backlogs in health care and public health
                  standing a disease allows other jurisdictions to put in          that must now be cleared. The TD Bank has estimated
                  place appropriate measures for its control and to learn          the net cost of the outbreak to the national economy at
                  from the experience of others. SARS has driven home              between $1.5 billion and $2.1 billion.
                  the need for timely and accurate reporting of information
                  on epidemics and their investigation to the national             The foregoing analysis may add to the impression from
                  level, with subsequent reporting to other countries and          Chapter 2 that SARS in Canada was not an exemplar of
                  international bodies. At times during the SARS outbreak,         outbreak management. However, so far as the Committee
                  it seemed that reports through the public health system          can tell, all those directly involved made their very best
                  lagged significantly behind media reports, a situation           efforts. Countless health care and local public health
                  that did not engender international confidence.                  personnel conducted themselves in exemplary fashion.
                                                                                   To them goes the credit for containing an unprecedented
                  Outbreaks are often highly visible and are conducted             and sudden outbreak of a hitherto-unknown and
                  under intense public, political and media scrutiny.              moderately communicable disease, with a meaningful
                  Communications with the media, clinical personnel,               fatality rate. Various other positive actions and
                  governments, and the public are all extremely                    developments are worth noting.
                  important. We return to intra- and inter-organizational
                  communication in Chapter 8. Media demands on local               In British Columbia, alerts issued by the BC CDC set the
                  and provincial public health officials were intense and          stage for the early recognition and isolation of the
                  time-consuming during the SARS outbreak. Management              province’s first SARS case at Vancouver General Hospital.
                  of communications was widely seen to be substandard, as          Public health surveillance measures were instituted, and
                  indicated already in Chapter 2. Federal communications           an Emergency Operations Centre was opened. There
                  were generally reactive as Health Canada waited for the          were regular teleconferences among BC CDC experts,
                  latest press conference in Ontario, and provincial communi-      local medical health officers and the Provincial Health
                  cations in turn were frequently disorganized. Our percep-        Officer, and active liaison with the infectious disease
                  tion is that as the outbreak continued, various media            community. All physicians received direct communication
                  outlets themselves took on the role of public educators          about case definitions and protective measures, and a
                  and modulators of risk communication in a commendable            website was established. Additional cases of SARS in
                  effort to stabilize community perceptions of the crisis.         British Columbia were managed effectively, as were
                                                                                   suspect cases of SARS in other provinces.
                  The control of an epidemic through public health
                  measures is the immediate purpose for epidemic investi-          In Ontario, despite tensions between provincial and
                  gations. With disease spreading, decisions on public             federal public health officials, data did flow and inter-
                  health interventions need to be taken quickly and often          national reporting proceeded on a regular basis. Experts
S A R S




                  with incomplete information. The actions that are taken          from local public health units and Health Canada
                  in controlling any epidemic have very significant costs          collaborated in cluster investigation. The federal govern-
                  and may be controversial or highly unpopular. In the             ment assisted directly with the recruitment of various
                  SARS epidemic, case detection, isolation of cases, follow        public health professionals such as epidemiologists,
f r o m




                  up and quarantine of contacts, strict infection control          community medicine physicians, case investigators
                  measures in hospitals, closure of hospitals, airline passenger   (i.e., public health nurses/inspectors) and public health
                  screening and travel advisories were the main tools used         managers. Ultimately, an effort by all three levels of
                  to control the epidemic nationally and globally. Along           government with support from stakeholders such as the
L e a r n i n g




                  with massive impacts on tourism and travel, the outbreak         Canadian Public Health Association allowed Toronto’s
                                                                                   personnel needs to be met. Health Canada staff also



                  96        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

worked with P/T representatives to create working groups
on surveillance, infection control, clinical management,
                                                             5B. The Auditor General’s
laboratory issues and public health management.                  Perspective
The control efforts in Toronto involved multiple jurisdic-   Well before SARS appeared in Canada, the Auditor General
tions, and were carried out in a blaze of publicity. All     highlighted the challenges faced by the nation in
leaders of the outbreak containment efforts worked day       operationalizing an infectious disease surveillance system
and night. Local public health agencies overcame systems     through existing F/P/T processes. The Auditor General’s
deficiencies and effectively managed an overwhelming         reports in September 1999 and September 2002 were
workload. Volunteerism was the order of the day, as          highly critical of the failure of the F/P/T process to
exemplified by the contribution of the Scientific Advisory   establish the needed infrastructure and concluded that
Committee and various clinical experts who worked at         these failings were impairing Canada’s ability to detect
the Provincial Operations Centre and SARS Operations         and respond to such outbreaks. Drawing on the report
Centre in Toronto. Ontario was forced to activate its        prepared for the Committee by our legal consultant,
new emergency plans for the first time in the face of a      Prof. Sujit Choudhry, the Auditor General’s findings are
mysterious and dangerous virus. Anxieties at times ran       summarized below.
high, but citizens in affected areas were calm and
generally tolerant of the disruption to their lives.         Health Canada depends on the voluntary cooperation of
Compliance with quarantine and other public health           provincial and territorial authorities, both regarding health
measures was extremely high. The Ministry of Health          surveillance (including case reporting) and responses to
and hospitals alike learned from the first wave of the       outbreaks. The large body of federal, provincial and
outbreak, and used a more selective approach to clinical     territorial legislation that governs public health does not
care of SARS patients in the second wave. Stakeholder        spell out the terms of inter-jurisdictional cooperation.
organizations such as the Ontario Hospital Association       Non-legal documents such as policy statements,
and the Ontario Medical Association made strenuous           intergovernmental agreements and memoranda of under-
efforts to communicate with their members about SARS         standing are used inconsistently to formalize the terms of
and to support the outbreak response. The outbreak           intergovernmental collaboration. Although there are
affected students and trainees in many disciplines who       disease specific arrangements (e.g., AIDS), there is no
receive training within hospitals; it also occurred at the   comprehensive F/P/T document that assigns specific roles
time of final examinations for post-secondary institutions   and responsibilities to federal, provincial and territorial
and Royal College examinations for resident physicians       government actors. The lack of formal terms of cooperation
completing their specialty training. Nevertheless, all the   impedes rapid responses to emergency situations. Formal




                                                                                                                             C a n a d a
involved educational institutions were able to manage in     documents are clearly necessary to deal with issues such
ways that enabled—or will allow—students to complete         as data sharing, data ownership, privacy, permitted
their programs or examinations on schedule. Hospitals        distribution of data, and the consequences of governmental
showed unprecedented adaptability, and the bravery of a      non-compliance with these terms.
range of health care workers, including front-line nurses,
                                                             Although the situation for AIDS, influenza and enteric




                                                                                                                             i n
physicians, rehabilitation professionals, respiratory and
laboratory technicians, and ambulance personnel/             diseases improved between 1999 and 2002, the Auditor
paramedics, was little short of heroic.                      General found that the general picture as of September


                                                                                                                             H e a l t h
                                                             2002 remained worrisome with respect to the timeliness,
These, moreover, are just a few of the success stories of    accuracy and completeness of data. Provinces continued
SARS in Canada. They reflect people and institutions         to vary in their reporting to Health Canada. For example,
rising to the occasion in the face of suboptimal systems     only 8 provinces (representing 55% of the population)
and inadequate preparation. To paraphrase T.S. Eliot, we     reported cases of chicken pox. By 2002, an informal
                                                                                                                             P u b l i c



can never build systems so perfect that people no longer     national agreement existed on the list of reportable diseases
need to be good. But the greatest lesson of SARS in          and most recent provincial lists of reportable diseases do
Canada is arguably that there is no excuse for tolerating    show substantial and reassuring congruence. However,
systems so imperfect that bad things happen unnecessarily    the flow of data to Ottawa remains inconsistent. Some
to good people.                                              provinces report diseases electronically; others do not.
                                                                                                                             o f




                                                             Provinces themselves are coping with under-reporting
                                                             or non-reporting of new cases by providers. For example,
                                                                                                                             R e n e w a l




                                                             a study of FluWatch in 1997-98 revealed that even with
                                                             a rota of interested physicians, only 60% submitted a



..........................................................................................                            97
                  .................................................................................................

                  report each week. In addition, data on hospitalizations        The Canadian Enteric Outbreak Surveillance Centre (CEOSC)
                  and deaths from flu were neither timely nor accurate—          now provides an electronic vehicle for public health
                  a situation that has not changed and has adverse impli-        practitioners and users, thereby allowing a growing
                  cations for SARS surveillance.                                 number of officials to exchange and discuss information
                                                                                 about enteric outbreaks in a secure environment. Health
                  An F/P/T process has been at work for several years to         Canada’s Health Products and Food Branch has revised
                  develop an integrated national public health surveillance      its Food Illness Outbreak Response Protocol. The Branch
                  network, through the Network for Health Surveillance in        intends to consult with provincial and territorial govern-
                  Canada. These committees include the Health Surveillance       ment authorities in the Fall and will seek endorsement of
                  Working Group, the Communicable Disease Surveillance           the Protocol by F/P/T Deputy Ministers of Health in
                  Sub-Group, the Canadian Public Health Laboratory Network,      December 2003. In sum, progress continues, but it is
                  the National Health Surveillance Infostructure Project,        slow and fragmentary.
                  and the Canadian Integrated Public Health Surveillance
                  Project [CIPHS]. Health Canada’s Centre for Surveillance
                  Coordination was set up in 2000 to provide leadership
                                                                                 5C. Managing Public Health
                  on intergovernmental coordination. The Auditor General             Emergencies
                  reported in September 2002 that some progress had been
                  made. The Health Surveillance Working Group had                5C.1 Public Health qua Firefighting
                  agreed that a health surveillance infostructure should be
                                                                                 SARS can be considered as a relevant and revealing test
                  developed. However, no specific timelines had been set,
                                                                                 of the resilience and the flexibility of the public health
                  and the Auditor-General’s office was told that a national
                                                                                 infrastructure to manage health emergencies of any
                  system would “take several to many years” to develop,
                                                                                 kind. Emergency management experts advise that the
                  particularly in the absence of targeted funding.
                                                                                 successful resolution of an emergency, whether in health
                                                                                 or otherwise, always requires preparedness, planning,
                  More recently, welcome agreement has been secured on
                                                                                 efficient and well-coordinated responses, and quick and
                  data elements for the core data set of communicable
                                                                                 accurate decision making by the responders.
                  diseases, and progress is being made on disease-specific
                  data sets. The federal government has developed both
                                                                                 A common metaphor for this successful emergency
                  the Laboratory Data Management System and, as noted
                                                                                 continuum is firefighting. Detection of the blaze is akin
                  above, i-PHIS, both components of the Canadian Integrated
                                                                                 to the action of an astute nurse, pharmacist, or physician
                  Public Health Surveillance program. These platforms
                                                                                 who detects an unusual illness or disease cluster and
                  have been adopted by many provinces, most recently
                                                                                 immediately alerts the relevant administrators or local
                  Ontario post-SARS. On the positive side, the federal
                                                                                 public health department. The response of firefighters is
                  government will continue to cover the cost of software
                                                                                 analogous to the response by front-line public health
                  development and provinces are able to add specific modules
                                                                                 workers at the local level. The analogy extends to decision
                  as they see fit. However, we have seen that i-PHIS lacked
                                                                                 making about the need for support. With any large
                  the capacity to manage an outbreak, and has not been
                                                                                 blaze, an incident commander arrives on the scene and
                  adopted by the local public health units where the front-
                                                                                 must assess whether the fire is beyond the capacity of his
                  line work of SARS containment was done. The Laboratory
                                                                                 or her crew. If so, back-up equipment and personnel are
                  Data Management System has not won consistently
                                                                                 called. Effective public health emergency response similarly
                  favourable reviews even inside the Health Canada labora-
                                                                                 requires the presence of an authority on the scene who is
                  tory system. Although CIPHS will allow for real-time
                                                                                 charged with direct command-and-control responsibility.
                  reporting at the national level, these data will not be
                                                                                 We expect that firefighters and fire engines from different
                  comprehensive in scope, because some provinces are still
S A R S




                                                                                 jurisdictions will come together seamlessly to contain an
                  not participating. Health Canada’s aim is to pass the
                                                                                 emergency. In the public health field, this seamlessness
                  infostructure development project to a federal/provincial/
                                                                                 can only come about from effective preparedness and
                  territorial consortium (the CIPHS Collaborative). However,
                                                                                 coordination by public health authorities at the local,
                  some informants suggested to the Committee that a
f r o m




                                                                                 provincial, federal and territorial levels. As with fire-
                  large-scale and customized architecture was undesirable,
                                                                                 fighting, there must be knowledge of common operating
                  and that the way forward should be more incremental,
                                                                                 procedures, compatible training and equipment and,
                  relying on flexible and widely-available commercial
                                                                                 most importantly, prior agreements for mutual assistance
                  software as the primary platform. Thus, both technical
L e a r n i n g




                                                                                 in emergencies requiring a sudden surge capacity.
                  and jurisdictional issues are still in play, and exacerbated
                  by resource constraints.



                  98        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

The public health analogy can also be extended back to         necessary for dealing with it.” Similar requirements exist
prevention of fires. For example, municipal governments        at the provincial level, where multiple P/T jurisdictions
implement building codes to require flame retardant            have been reviewing and upgrading their emergency
construction materials. Firefighters spend considerable        planning and preparedness frameworks. Plans and
time in fire safety education aimed at preventing fires and    preparations undertaken by the federal government
preparing citizens to do first-line firefighting at home, in   departments focus on actions to assist provinces when
institutions, or in workplaces. Analogous activities are       their capacity to respond is exceeded, to save lives and to
food safety and public health inspection, immunizations,       preserve peace, order and good government. Federal
and various health promotion activities. When prevention       departments are also expected to prepare for transborder
breaks down or is inadequate, firefighters move to             or international emergencies with appropriate policy, risk
emergency response mode, as do public health workers.          analysis and communication strategies.

In the preceding sections, we saw that F/P/T collaboration     All federal departments involved in an emergency follow
has been inadequate in the realm of disease surveillance       four key response principles: an all-hazards approach;
and outbreak management. Had the SARS outbreak                 decentralization to departments that assume command
mushroomed into a truly national epidemic, our lack of         and control; interdepartmental coordination; and federal/
preparedness could have been disastrous. The SARS              provincial coordination. The first three are straightforward.
outbreak and subsequent events in Toronto therefore            The all-hazards approach recognizes that while the causes
illustrate the need to address public health emergency         of emergencies and disasters are diverse, the response
response gaps and to develop a more comprehensive              capabilities to deal with them are frequently similar. In
approach to managing public health emergencies                 the federal government structure, emergency planning
through a truly pan-Canadian system.                           and response is decentralized to take advantage of relevant
                                                               knowledge and expertise as well as command-and-control
This integrated pan-Canadian system should encompass           capacity, resources, and regulatory tools residing within
all the tools, plans and agreements necessary to respond       different departments. While some emergencies may be
to SARS or to any other large scale public health              dealt with by a single federal department or agency,
emergency. If, as we have seen, governments cannot             most incidents warranting a federal response require the
agree on surveillance strategies during ‘business as usual’,   involvement of a number of departments. In all cases,
then one can hardly expect them to work cohesively in          one department takes the lead role that assumes command
the heat of an outbreak.                                       and control while others play supporting roles.

5C.2 The National Emergency Framework                          It is at the level of F/P/T collaboration and coordination




                                                                                                                               C a n a d a
                                                               that the gaps emerge. All provincial and territorial
The federal government’s generic emergency framework           governments have constitutional responsibility for the
assesses incidents on a spectrum progressing from small        safety, security and well-being of their citizens. The
to large and from the slightly consequential to the            provinces and territories have all created frameworks to
catastrophic. Emergencies, including disease outbreaks,        meet their constitutional responsibilities, and as noted,
progress along a jurisdictional spectrum from the local




                                                                                                                               i n
                                                               modernized these apace in many instances. However, to
response, up to provincial, national, continental and          the best of the Committee’s knowledge, the federal,
ultimately international levels.                               provincial and territorial frameworks have not been


                                                                                                                               H e a l t h
                                                               analyzed for comparability and interoperability. Federal
The federal policy for emergencies accordingly assumes a       and provincial emergency planning must be as integrated
hierarchy of response moving through successive levels         as possible to avoid confusion and duplication of effort
of government in a mutually supportive chain. All              and to ensure a timely flow of essential information and
federal government departments are required under the          advice between levels of government. In other words,
                                                                                                                               P u b l i c



Emergencies Act and the Emergency Preparedness Act to          what happened with SARS could happen with a natural
have their own departmental emergency plans. The               disaster.
latter legislation, proclaimed in 1988, puts a particularly
clear onus on federal ministers to be prepared for civil
emergencies, and “to monitor any potential, imminent
                                                                                                                               o f




or actual civil emergency and to report, as required, to
other ministers on the emergency and any measures
                                                                                                                               R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                              99
                  .................................................................................................


                  5C.3 Focal Points for Health Emergencies                      CEPR has integrated functions that would be carried out
                                                                                in most provincial settings by the Chief Medical Officer
                  The federal government created the Centre for Emergency       of Health, Emergency Health Director, and Emergency
                  Preparedness and Response [CEPR] in July 2000 to act as       Social Services Director. Not all provinces have created
                  a national coordinating point for public health security      parallel structures that provide a single focal point for
                  within Health Canada and across various levels of govern-     health emergencies. In Ontario, the Commissioner of
                  ment in the country. This addressed the need for a more       Public Security and Commissioner of Public Health shared
                  consistent, sustainable and integrated approach to            the lead role in the SARS outbreak, contributing to a lack
                  preparing for and responding to all types of public health    of clarity about authority. In Quebec, an all-hazards
                  emergencies in Canada. The Centre brought together most       approach to emergency preparedness and response is led
                  of Health Canada’s emergency preparedness and response        from a planning hub within the Ministère de la Sécurité
                  programs and created a ‘critical mass’ of resources to        Publique. This hub assigns an emergency response coor-
                  allow for a more cohesive and synergistic response to         dinator to other departments who become part of a
                  emergency situations from both a departmental and             network for integrated information sharing and response.
                  interdepartmental perspective.                                The Quebec model is attractive, but could also lead to
                                                                                some of the same challenges as emerged in Ontario.
                  The CEPR mandate focuses on public health issues
                  arising from various threats to the safety and health         The Committee recognizes that health emergencies such
                  security of Canadians, including:                             as major infectious disease outbreaks rapidly become
                                                                                general emergencies, with a panoply of concerns that
                  • natural events and disasters such as floods, earthquakes,   spill across multiple government departments. The
                    fires and highly dangerous infectious diseases; and         choice of a lead official from the health department or
                  • human-caused disasters such as accidents or criminal        from public security will depend on the specific nature of
                    and terrorist acts involving explosives, chemicals,         the threat to population health. What is needed, in any
                    radioactive substances or biological threats.               event, is a clear protocol for determining a lead official,
                                                                                appropriate expertise around that individual, and the
                  CEPR, in collaboration with provincial and territorial        delegation of appropriate command-and-control authority
                  governments, operates the National Emergency Stockpile        to the leader of the response to a public health emergency.
                  System [NESS]. This system, little known to Canadians,        The federal CEPR has the advantage of creating a major
                  maintains $300 million in medical services, supplies and      focus for health emergencies that can either take the lead
                  equipment in a state of readiness for immediate distribu-     itself, or connect smoothly to broader emergency response
                  tion to provinces and territories in the event of a human-    machinery. It was not fully tested by SARS and the
                  caused or natural disaster. NESS contains supplies found      strengths and weaknesses of the model may only become
                  in medical treatment centres ranging in size from small       apparent in a larger-scale crisis. The Ontario SARS
                  field medical units right up to a large hospital, including   experience, in contrast, constituted a particularly difficult
                  beds and blankets, and pharmaceuticals. The stockpile         first test for that province’s new emergency machinery.
                  includes 165 emergency 200-bed hospitals that are             Comparing notes across F/P/T jurisdictions seems prudent
                  transportable on short notice either by truck or airplane.    to determine whether current legislative, regulatory, and
                  They are stockpiled throughout the country and can be         administrative elements are optimally organized either to
                  set up in existing buildings such as schools and community    exert the required command-and-control functions in a
                  centres. The Committee recognizes the utility of NESS         public health emergency, or to allow smooth interactions
                  and recommends that the stocks and the operating              between health departments and a command-and-control
                  principles be updated to allow for interoperability with      function vested in another branch of government, such
                                                                                as an office or department of public security.
S A R S




                  current health care facilities. As the situation with N95
                  masks showed during the SARS outbreak, a sourcing and
                  clearinghouse function on the part of NESS may be more        5C.4 The Post-September 11
                  important than the creation of static stockpiles. We also          Environment
f r o m




                  see the need for F/P/T training and exercises to ensure
                                                                                In the immediate aftermath of September 11, 2001 terrorist
                  that personnel are familiar with the equipment in this
                                                                                attacks on the World Trade Center and the anthrax bio-
                  largely unrecognized national resource.
                                                                                terrorist attacks in the United States, the federal, provincial
                                                                                and territorial Ministers of Health met to plan a common
L e a r n i n g




                                                                                response and to map out a strategy for strengthening the
                                                                                public health sector’s emergency prevention, detection



                  100       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

and response capacities. The public health system was        National Smallpox Contingency Plan and the Pandemic
recognized as the key mechanism whereby such threats         Influenza Plan. For example, work on the National
can be prevented or contained. Our American neighbour’s      Smallpox Contingency Plan involved provincial and
tragedy sparked an important degree of solidarity at the     territorial consultations that brought together over
F/P/T tables that we hope will carry over, post-SARS, to     200 individuals from a variety of professional streams
the broader goal of enhancing public health in Canada.       including public health officials, laboratory scientists,
                                                             epidemiologists, emergency health services, emergency
In October 2001, the F/P/T Deputy Ministers of Health        social services, and ambulatory services. And as we have
created the Special Task Force on Emergency Preparedness     seen, work on Pandemic Influenza Planning formed the
and Response with broad representation. In March 2002,       platform for some successful F/P/T interactions during
the Special Task Force tabled 31 recommendations             the SARS outbreak.
grouped under broad clusters such as: leadership and
coordination; surge capacity; training and education;        More generally, CEPR has been working with provinces,
surveillance and detection infrastructure (including         territories, and other federal departments to update and
laboratories); supplies; and communications. The F/P/T       expand Emergency Preparedness Training with a view to
Deputy Ministers and Ministers of Health endorsed the        incorporating public health needs, but these activities are
recommendations of the Special Task Force, and created       still under-resourced and underdeveloped. Effective
the F/P/T Network for Emergency Preparedness and             emergency response also requires timely communication
Response to develop strategies and a plan to implement       and passage of information among all response partners.
the recommendations. The Special Task Force went to          The SARS outbreak clearly illustrated that many of the
great lengths to promote the benefits of enhanced F/P/T      necessary data-sharing arrangements and business process
coordination across virtually every area of concern.         agreements have yet to be developed. The emergency
                                                             paradigm presumes that there will be sustained efforts to
Notably, the Task Force emphasized the importance of         develop, test and maintain interoperability amongst
building on existing public health infrastructures to        federal, provincial and territorial emergency operations
achieve effective emergency response coordination across     centres. This includes conjoint training exercises. As a
Canada. This idea of “filling in the gaps” rather than       corollary, the Committee sees an urgent requirement for
starting from scratch recognizes that our public health      multi-jurisdictional planning to create integrative
infrastructure remains the best basis from which to          protocols for outbreak management, followed by training
prevent, detect, respond to and manage disease outbreaks—    exercises to test the protocols and assure a high degree of
including terrorist actions based on chemical, biological    preparedness to manage outbreaks.
and radionuclear weapons of mass destruction.




                                                                                                                               C a n a d a
                                                             In sum, at the time of the World Trade Center and anthrax
Since March 2002, the various partners in the F/P/T          attacks, emergency leaders in health services, social services,
Network for Emergency Preparedness and Response have         public security, and public health worked independently
been working to integrate public health practices into a     from one another in most Canadian jurisdictions. Progress
truly national emergency management system. The              has since been made in collaboration across and within




                                                                                                                               i n
national emergency management system aims to support         jurisdictions. Canadian governments at all levels need to
strategic investments in public health security; enhance     capitalize on this momentum, and invest urgently
cross-sectoral and cross-jurisdictional collaboration;       in formal mechanisms to exchange information, share


                                                                                                                               H e a l t h
increase information sharing; establish clear emergency      best practices, undertake conjoint training, integrate and
management protocols, roles and responsibilities; and        test contingency plans, and examine the interoperability
establish greater coordination between emergency health      of processes, protocols and equipment to respond to
and social services and public health practitioners.         health emergencies.
                                                                                                                               P u b l i c



The Network has already supported the federal CEPR’s         The Committee also wishes to emphasize the need for
efforts to develop a National Emergency Transportation       involvement of non-governmental organizations [NGOs]
Strategy that will ensure the transportation of samples,     and employers in the process of emergency preparedness.
personnel, materials, supplies and medical countermeasures   In this respect, long before the 9/11 attacks, six Canadian
in emergencies whatever they may be. The Emergency           NGOs had agreed to share resources in an emergency and
                                                                                                                               o f




Preparedness and Response Framework is also being            settle up the financial implications later—an example
applied to public health emergencies. The Network has        that governments could emulate. Major employers have
                                                                                                                               R e n e w a l




been involved in the development of a series of integrated   their own role to play. For example, during the SARS
national emergency response plans including the              outbreak, a major information technology company in


..........................................................................................                             101
                  .................................................................................................

                  Toronto took prompt action, activating an eight-point          CEPR established the National Office of Health Emergency
                  contingency plan to shut down operations after an              Response Teams in December 2001. Subsequently, F/P/T
                  employee left quarantine and arrived at work with SARS-        Deputy Ministers and Ministers of Health have unanimously
                  like symptoms. However, little is known about the state        endorsed the principles for the development of Health
                  of corporate emergency plans more generally and the            Emergency Response Teams [HERT]. The National Office
                  degree of interaction between major employers and              has a broad mandate to oversee funding, recruitment,
                  public health units or emergency measures/public security      planning, equipment, training and education, field
                  offices. Communication with major employers, and               exercises, operational deployment, transportation and
                  especially with enterprises involved with high volumes of      coordination of the teams.
                  human traffic such as hotels, airports, and transportation
                  providers (e.g., VIA Rail) was suboptimal during the SARS      A HERT would be composed of professional health
                  outbreak. These links must be strengthened as part of          personnel specially trained and certified for rapid
                  emergency preparedness.                                        deployment to disaster sites across the country. Each
                                                                                 HERT would follow a generic “all hazards” approach
                  5C.5 Building Surge Capacity                                   encompassing emergency medical response to natural
                                                                                 events such as earthquakes, tornadoes and to man-made
                  The outbreak of SARS has reinforced the need for surge         disasters including chemical hazardous material spills
                  capacity to provide greater flexibility in health and public   and chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear terrorist
                  health emergency response. Developing robust surge             attacks and, in the aftermath of SARS, infectious disease
                  capacity across jurisdictions is predicated on adequate        outbreaks. These teams would be positioned in strategic
                  professional resources, a depth of skill sets and overcoming   locations across the country, and available to assist and
                  jurisdictional legislative and regulatory barriers to allow,   support local/provincial/territorial health authorities in
                  for instance, medical practitioners and health professionals   the management of emergencies.
                  to act outside their licensing jurisdiction in emergencies.
                  A number of stakeholder briefs addressed this topic,           While the HERT model has been developed as a multi-
                  including a joint communication from nine national             disciplinary group of clinical and support personnel for
                  health-related associations.                                   “all hazards”, the SARS experience has highlighted the
                                                                                 need to be able to mobilize select groups of skilled
                  At the outset, the Committee endorses the Canadian             personnel such as quarantine officers and public health
                  Public Health Association’s caveat: the concept of surge       nurses. The related concept of ‘epidemic response teams’
                  capacity must be based on a sufficiency of capacity for        has been endorsed by various stakeholder submissions.
                  ‘business as usual’, thereby allowing effective redirection    Nonetheless, the HERT program has the potential to be a
                  of resources in time of need. The Canadian Federation          platform for the mobilization of personnel to address the
                  of Nurses Unions and other stakeholders similarly              specific requirements of a health emergency, such as an
                  emphasized that surge capacity is difficult to create when     epidemic or major outbreak of infectious disease. The
                  there are shortfalls in resources for usual public health      concept is already complemented by specialized surge
                  and personal health service needs.                             capacity-building that is underway through the F/P/T
                                                                                 Network for Emergency Preparedness and Response, viz.
                  To create surge capacity for emergencies, the above-noted      development and deployment of a Smallpox Emergency
                  F/P/T Task Force on Emergency Preparedness and Response        Response Force and Pandemic Influenza Response Teams.
                  endorsed the concept of establishing a national framework
                  to mobilize teams of professionally-qualified first            The federal government would activate HERTs at the
                  responders to crisis sites as requested by a provincial/       request of the province or territory, or alternatively, in
                  territorial or international authority. The Canadian concept   response to an event falling within the jurisdiction of
S A R S




                  is modelled after the United States’ National Disaster         federal responsibilities. A HERT deployed at Kananaskis
                  Medical System. The US system has included the organi-         in the support of the G8 Summit is an example of the
                  zation of over 7,000 volunteer clinical personnel into         latter function.
                  trained response teams for quick disaster response. For
f r o m




                  example, the US federal government was able to place           Sponsorship of a HERT can range from local organizations
                  four to five teams at the periphery of the World Trade         such as a hospital or local health department to provinces
                  Towers collapse within hours of the event. The Canadian        and territories. Coverage for professional and legal
                  concept builds on and expands the US approach.                 liabilities must still be determined as part of the HERT
L e a r n i n g




                                                                                 development process, but this problem is surmountable
                                                                                 with appropriate funding. The Committee is aware of a



                  102       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

similar provincial proposal developed by some clinical                          Health Canada’s in-house specialists have done their own
leaders in Toronto and Hamilton after SARS, and we                              assessment post-SARS and noted the need for a clearer
expect that parallel structures may emerge in multiple                          framework for F/P/T collaboration. Prior to SARS, an
jurisdictions. Again, however, the goal must be to coor-                        F/P/T group had in fact worked together to develop a
dinate activities seamlessly, rather than set up overlapping                    National Crisis Communications Strategy aimed at helping
and competing teams. For example, in the current                                Canadian governments plan for, and respond to, the
national framework, if a HERT is deployed for emergencies                       communications challenges inherent in a wide range of
that do not cross provincial boundaries and do not                              emergencies from natural disasters and disease outbreaks
require federal intervention, then upon request by the                          to terrorist actions. This work must move ahead promptly.
province or territory to the federal government, the team
would be designated to assist the provincial response.                          The Committee appreciates that communicating accurate
The responsibility for all costs, equipment replacement,                        data to the public during a fast-moving outbreak can be
licensing, liability and all other factors directly and                         enormously difficult, and SARS was no exception. A
indirectly related to the use of the teams then becomes a                       particular challenge was the lag in characterizing cases.
provincial or territorial responsibility.                                       Epidemic curves posted on the Health Canada website
                                                                                were constructed by date of onset. This is a more consistent
Based on the SARS precedent, expedited cross-jurisdictional                     and valid approach than tallying new cases by the date
licensure of healthcare personnel should be feasible to                         that they came to attention. However, there is a Catch-22.
facilitate HERT activity. One option is that the licensing                      If new cases are assigned back to an earlier date of onset,
authority in the affected province should accept all                            it can appear as if the outbreak is over prematurely. If
qualified individuals for the purpose and duration of the                       new cases are instead reported to the media as part of a
emergency as long as those persons are appropriately                            cumulative case count, the impression is created that the
licensed in at least one province/territory in Canada.                          outbreak is still snowballing when the number of new
The functioning of HERTs will require enthusiastic and                          cases might actually be falling. One way around this
committed partnerships at all levels of stakeholders from                       problem is the use of statistical projections to control for
federal departments, provinces and territories, NGOs,                           anticipated reporting delays. The other is to report the
regional and municipal agencies and health care                                 data from different analytical perspectives, an approach
organizations, healthcare facilities, and individual                            that could cause confusion but is more comprehensive
professionals.1                                                                 and accurate.

5C.6 Crisis Communications to the Public:                                       These communications nuances were apparently addressed
     A Missing Link                                                             ‘on the fly’ during the outbreak. The Committee has




                                                                                                                                                             C a n a d a
                                                                                ascertained that Health Canada does not have a sophis-
Communications to the public during an emergency are                            ticated analytical framework for risk communication.
crucial, as we have seen. During the SARS outbreak,                             Health Canada must build expert capacity in this area.
Health Canada determined at the outset to identify one
consistent spokesperson in English and one in French.                           Similar shortcomings were evident elsewhere during the
Liaison was established with the Ontario Government




                                                                                                                                                             i n
                                                                                SARS outbreak. Focus groups with front-line staff (see
Communications Office and with CDC Communications                               Chapter 8) suggested that even within well-established
in Atlanta. Among the other strategies were: creating                           and close-knit organizations that had crisis plans in


                                                                                                                                                             H e a l t h
and continually updating a SARS website, establishing a                         place, risk communication was suboptimal during the
24/7 1-800 public information line; briefing media; and                         SARS outbreak.
issuing travel advisories, an activity to which we return
in Chapter 11. Federal spokespeople understandably had                          Peter M. Sandman was consulted by the CDC about its
a lower profile than provincial and local health leaders                        crisis communications strategies, an area of increased
                                                                                                                                                             P u b l i c



and clinical experts, and communications strategies, as                         emphasis and investment for that organization in the
with other elements of outbreak management, were not                            wake of the anthrax attacks on the US. Sandman and
well-coordinated across jurisdictions.                                          Jody Lanard have published various documents2 that offer
                                                                                a useful perspective on risk communication during SARS
                                                                                and more generally, including a set of counterintuitive but
                                                                                                                                                             o f




1 As regards partnerships, the Canadian Pharmacists Association has highlighted the need to consider role re-definition in the face of public health
                                                                                                                                                             R e n e w a l




  emergencies. They recommend that legislation be amended to allow pharmacists to administer vaccines in the case of pandemics or biological
  warfare/terrorism. This could bring thousands of additional front-line health professionals into play to support epidemic response.
2 See http//www.psandman.com [Enter searchword SARS to locate several items].



..........................................................................................                                                             103
                  .................................................................................................

                  compelling axioms for crisis communication. For example,         crisis communications training program3 that, in our
                  they suggest that downplaying the risk of an outbreak            view, bears close study and early emulation. Nothing
                  such as SARS is ultimately damaging; over-reassurance            we have seen from any F/P/T jurisdiction to date is
                  should be avoided. Spokespeople should not conceal               comparable.
                  their fears or downplay risks; “a fearless leader is a useless
                  role model.” Intriguingly, they urge communicators to
                  be “at least as worried in public as you are in private.”
                                                                                   5D. National Capacity and Network
                  The paternalistic assumption that the public should be               for Disease Surveillance &
                  blandly reassured is wrong. Instead, lay risk assessments
                  should be respected. (In the Committee’s view, a corollary
                                                                                       Outbreak Management
                  is that the risk assessments of front-line health care workers   Focusing on smallpox, SARS or pandemic influenza raises
                  should also be respected.) The goal of communication             the risk of over-investing limited resources in managing a
                  should be to teach the public what useful steps they can         restricted range of public health emergencies rather than
                  take to help fight the outbreak, rather than offering            engineering a system that can be flexible and responsive
                  reassurances that will ring false.                               as well as sustainable. This section focuses on how to
                                                                                   build provincial and territorial capacity for responding to
                  Sandman and Lanard have been scathing in their                   communicable diseases, and how to connect that capacity
                  assessment of Canadian communications strategies                 into a strong network of federal, regional, and provincial
                  around SARS, particularly in comparison to the deft              hubs for disease surveillance and outbreak management.
                  handling of communications in Singapore:                         The network, in turn, must be linked to the existing
                                                                                   F/P/T Network for Emergency Preparedness and
                       “The same day WHO lifted Canada’s travel warning,           Response, thereby creating the multi-level protection that
                       the international health agency said that the worst         Canadians need and deserve.
                       of Singapore’s SARS outbreak seemed to be over.
                       Singapore health ministry spokeswoman Eunice Teo            By way of precedent, the European Commission formed a
                       responded masterfully by moving to the fulcrum of           Network on Communicable Diseases in 1999. It builds on
                       the risk communication seesaw. ‘The WHO said                the capacity of member states and focuses on surveillance
                       the peak is over in Singapore,’ she noted, ‘but our         and early warning for outbreaks with greater than national
                       minister has said it is too early to tell.’”                dimensions. The Commission has specified that communi-
                                                                                   cable diseases should be placed progressively under
                  This type of balance, in their view, ultimately generates        EU-wide surveillance. To monitor and track develop-
                  more sustainable public confidence “than Canada’s angry          ments, disease-specific networks have been created.
                  protests and premature celebrations. Canada’s foreign            At present, these consist mainly of key laboratories in
                  stakeholders (and in private, even its own citizens) are         participating countries. Following on from discussion
                  likely to sit on the worried, distrustful seat of the risk       over a number of years about the creation of an infectious
                  communication seesaw, since Canada is occupying the              disease agency for Europe, the European Commission has
                  over-reassuring, over-confident seat.”                           also just adopted a proposal to create a European Centre
                                                                                   for Disease Prevention and Control by 2005. The Centre
                  Public opinion research commissioned by Health Canada            will have a small core staff and coordinate an extended
                  suggests that Canadians were actually riding the “seesaw”        network in member states. Fifteen European countries
                  alongside various spokespersons, not reacting to them.           sponsor the European Program for Intervention
                  A poll was taken after the WHO travel advisory when              Epidemiology Training. It is similar to Canada’s Field
                  political and health leaders united to highlight the progress    Epidemiology Training Program, but also represents a
                  being made in containing the outbreak. Among respon-
S A R S




                                                                                   potential F/P/T collaborative model. In short, if the
                  dents nationally, 62% said the SARS situation was                sovereign nations of Europe have come together around
                  improving on April 29-30, 2003, up from just 33% during          infectious disease surveillance and management, how can
                  April 25-26, 2003. In Toronto, 68% said the situation            Canada allow F/P/T tensions to undermine its response
                  had gotten better. Nonetheless, given the second wave of         to public health threats?
f r o m




                  SARS in Toronto, Sandman and Lanard’s comments about
                  sitting on “the over-reassuring, over-confident seat” seem
                  all too prophetic. The CDC now has a comprehensive
L e a r n i n g




                  3 See http//www.cdc.gov/cdcynergy/emergency/



                  104        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

Chapter 4 outlined a $300 million per annum investment           Estimating the required level of contributions through
for core public health functions that would help to              the new federal agency is not straightforward. As one
shore up Canada’s first line of local responses to disease       simple benchmark, approximately $40 million per
outbreaks and health threats, particularly when coupled          annum is invested by the BC CDC, outside of vaccines,
with a $100 million per annum injection of support for           to maintain an outstanding core infectious disease
new vaccines. The handling of the SARS outbreak in               facility for that province. British Columbia has 13% of
Ontario illustrates that a different level of functionality is   Canada’s population, thus roughly $280 million per
also needed—a second line of defence at the provincial or        annum would be required to sustain similar activity
regional level with surveillance, analytical, investigative      across Canada. However, other P/T jurisdictions have
and coordinating capacity. Quebec’s National Institute           already developed some capacity analogous to the BC
of Public Health and British Columbia’s Centre for               CDC, not least Quebec through its multidisciplinary
Disease Control both offer models in this respect.               National Institute of Public Health.
We focus on the BC CDC because of its primary mandate
in infectious diseases.                                          As well, this second line of defence could be construed as
                                                                 exclusively a P/T responsibility. We reject that argument
The BC CDC was established to be the province’s focal            as an abdication of federal responsibility on four counts.
point for “the prevention, detection and control of
communicable disease,” and a provider of specialty health        First, the Auditor General’s comments underscore an
support and resource services. The Centre integrates five        acute need to build surveillance capacity across Canada
divisions: Hepatitis Services; Epidemiology Services;            as a matter of broad national interest. Multiple stake-
Laboratory Services; STD/AIDS Control; and Tuberculosis          holders urged the Committee to foster a national approach
Control. Support services include Information                    to infectious disease surveillance. The US precedent
Management and Pharmacy. In April 2002, the BC CDC               suggests that national data and surveillance systems are
assimilated several new programs, including a Drug and           only achievable with dedicated federal funding. To that
Poison Information Centre; Food Protection Services; and         end, the investments in the new federal agency outlined
Radiation Protection Services. The BC CDC works closely          in Chapter 4 already presumed that $25 million per
with the provincial health ministry, Medical Health              annum towards surveillance would be drawn from a
Officers, and the Provincial Health Officer. Its annual          separate allocation for infectious diseases.
budget of approximately $70 million includes $30 million
for vaccinations and $40 million directed primarily to           Second, as the SARS experience demonstrated, even
control of communicable diseases. The BC CDC has                 substantially enhanced firepower in a new federal agency
catalyzed the creation of the University of British Columbia     will do little in the absence of a well-coordinated response




                                                                                                                                 C a n a d a
(UBC) Centre for Disease Control in research and teaching        to an outbreak at the provincial level. SARS has also
activities. The UBC CDC focuses on “collaborative                highlighted the importance of enhanced nosocomial
research into the surveillance, control and prevention of        infection control. Better linkages between public health
communicable disease” and “links academia, governments           and the clinical sphere, and the roll-up of institutional
and public health organizations in the understanding,            infection control activities to the P/T and ultimately




                                                                                                                                 i n
management and prevention of infectious diseases of              national level, will not be achieved without meaningful
public health significance.” The BC CDC has proven               funding.
sufficiently successful that its mandate is now broadening


                                                                                                                                 H e a l t h
to include other specialized areas beyond its communi-           Third, if any province fails to contain an outbreak
cable disease mandate.                                           efficiently, the results for all of Canada are devastating on
                                                                 multiple levels. We refer not just to the spread and toll
This type of investment and structure will not be attractive     of disease, but other impacts. The Greater Toronto Area,
or appropriate for all provinces and territories individually.   for example, accounts for approximately one-fifth of
                                                                                                                                 P u b l i c



Some provinces could structure their participation in a          Canada’s GDP, and SARS therefore had national economic
national network as a within-province network, drawing           implications.
on strengths in both public health and academe; smaller
provinces in a region may decide to pool resources and           Fourth, Ottawa’s revenue-collecting and spending powers
create a regional CDC. Transfers from the new federal            are disproportionate to its constitutional administrative
                                                                                                                                 o f




agency to catalyze this second-line capacity for surveillance    mandate in the Canadian federation. This tension in the
and outbreak management must accordingly allow for               national fabric places a constant onus on the federal
                                                                                                                                 R e n e w a l




reasonable P/T pluralism.                                        government to fund provincially-administered activities,
                                                                 particularly those that are in the broad national interest.


..........................................................................................                               105
                  .................................................................................................

                  On the other hand, the provinces also have revenue-            This ensures maximum flexibility for the Chief Public
                  generation mechanisms and access to new funds from             Health Officer of Canada and her/his provincial/territorial
                  the Canada Health and Social Transfer. The Committee           counterparts in aligning transfers with both provincial/
                  assumes that P/T jurisdictions would not claim their           territorial priorities and a national strategic plan.
                  rightful authority in a strengthened public health system
                  without taking responsibility for helping to fund it.          Although accountability for the transfers from the
                  Hence, just as the Public Health Partnerships Program          Communicable Disease Control Fund would be
                  would leverage P/T investments in local public health          determined between each P/T jurisdiction and the new
                  infrastructure, so also do we assume that federal transfers    federal agency, some proportion of the $100 million
                  for prevention and control of communicable diseases at         should be reserved for networking functions. The
                  the P/T and regional level would be matched in some            concept of a second line of defence presupposes strong
                  measure by the involved P/T jurisdictions.                     connections not only among provincial and regional
                                                                                 centres of excellence in infectious disease control, but
                  Weighing these factors and estimates, the Committee            also between these P/T nodes or hubs and the relevant
                  envisages that the Canadian Agency for Public Health           centres in the new federal agency. The latter could
                  should ultimately receive and earmark $100 million per         include the National Microbiology Laboratory, the Centre
                  annum for support of P/T capacity in infectious disease        for Infectious Disease Prevention and Control, the Centre
                  surveillance and outbreak containment in the form of a         for Surveillance Coordination, and the Centre for
                  Communicable Disease Control Fund. This is distinct from       Emergency Preparedness and Response.
                  and above the transfers recommended for general public
                  health infrastructure and immunizations, and completes         This F/P/T Network for Communicable Disease Control
                  the $500 million per annum suite of P/T contribution           could be formed quickly by connecting structures that
                  programs that the Committee views as necessary for the         already exist in some provinces (e.g., the BC CDC,
                  renewal of a national public health system. We anticipate      relevant centres in Quebec’s National Institute of Public
                  that these transfers would start at a lower level and rise     Health) to leaders from other provincial public health
                  over a number of years in response to enhanced capacity        branches pending their decision on the creation of
                  arising from increases in the numbers of skilled personnel     provincial centres of specialized expertise. Agreements
                  and interlocking P/T investments.                              among participating provinces and the relevant nodes
                                                                                 and centres within the Canadian Agency for Public Health
                  Initial allocations from this Communicable Disease Control     would be negotiated with the intent of maximizing co-
                  Fund should start flowing in advance of the creation of        location of facilities and personnel, and creating both
                  any new agency as part of preparedness for the winter          integrated disease surveillance machinery and graduated
                  influenza season. Similarly, the creation of an F/P/T          responses to infectious disease outbreaks. The network
                  Network for Communicable Disease Control can begin             would presumably include task forces or working groups
                  sooner rather than later to ensure that F/P/T jurisdictional   to address issues such as surveillance, outbreak
                  collaboration is enhanced, and that the nation is appro-       management and emergency response, nosocomial
                  priately positioned to respond to existing and emerging        infection control and hospital epidemiology, strategic
                  infectious diseases. We explain further in Chapter 9 how       communication, and related matters.
                  these transfers should be tied to intergovernmental
                  agreements and initiatives to secure standardized business     This new F/P/T network should seek to embody the same
                  processes and a harmonized legislative framework for           collaborative culture that has apparently emerged with
                  disease surveillance and outbreak management. For now,         the F/P/T Network for Emergency Preparedness and
                  we refer readers to Appendix 5.3 below for a summary of        Response or the Canadian Public Health Laboratory
                  the agreements required to promote a more seamless             Network (see Chapter 6). To that end, the communicable
S A R S




                  approach to outbreak management and prevent a                  diseases network should be mandated and supported by
                  recurrence of the inter-jurisdictional tensions evident        the F/P/T Conference of Deputy Ministers of Health. Its
                  during the SARS crisis.                                        steering committee would include designates from the
                                                                                 relevant provincial or regional centres and leaders of the
f r o m




                  As suggested in Chapter 4, the Communicable Disease            relevant federal centres.
                  Control Fund directed at infectious disease surveillance
                  and outbreak management could be bundled with the
                  Public Health Partnerships Program and National
L e a r n i n g




                  Immunization Strategy into a single transfer managed
                  according to the Social Union Framework Agreement.



                  106       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


5E. Recommendations                                        To elaborate: the Committee envisages that the system
                                                           would begin by collecting data on communicable diseases,
The Committee recommends that:                             and extend its ambit to non-communicable diseases as
                                                           well as relevant population health factors. The surveillance
5.1 Under the aegis of the new Canadian Agency for         system must be relevant at the local level, with timely
    Public Health, the Government of Canada should         reporting and analysis, and flexible enough to adapt to
    budget for a Communicable Disease Control              changing needs and different local and institutional
    Fund, allocating a sum rising over 2-3 years to        circumstances. Such a system must be built so that
    $100 million per annum in support of provincial,       databases can communicate with one another, and be
    territorial, and regional capacity for infectious      sufficiently ‘low tech’ to maximize uptake in hospitals
    disease surveillance, outbreak management, and         (not least hospital emergency rooms where renewal and
    related infection control activities, including        upgrading of information systems is urgently needed),
    the sponsorship of a new F/P/T network. Initial        clinics and public health units. The system should be
    allocations from this Fund should be made to           modular in both its conception and implementation, but
    facilitate immediate preparedness for a possible       with data collection mechanisms and software structured
    return of SARS to Canada during the winter             so as to permit the integration of information into a
    season of respiratory illnesses and influenza.         larger surveillance and public health information system.

5.2 The F/P/T Conference of Deputy Ministers of            The business process agreements for surveillance would
    Health should initiate a new Network for               cover multiple fronts, including:
    Communicable Disease Control that would link
    F/P/T activities in infectious disease surveillance,   a. Developing procedures for uniform and timely
    prevention, and management. This initiative               reporting of identified infectious diseases, including
    should be started as soon as possible, and inte-          new pathogens, by local authorities, provinces and
    grated with the existing F/P/T Network for                territories to Canadian Agency for Public Health. In
    Emergency Preparedness and Response.                      turn, the Agency should establish a system for rapid
5.3 The Canadian Agency for Public Health, in                 determination of diseases that must be reported on a
    partnership with the new F/P/T Network for                national basis.
    Communicable Disease Control, should give              b. Identifying relevant surveillance tools and methods as
    priority to infectious disease surveillance,              appropriate for health professionals in other settings to
    including provision of technical advice and               input data to the surveillance system (e.g., pharmacy
    funding to provincial/territorial jurisdictions




                                                                                                                           C a n a d a
                                                              identification of increased use of antidiarrheals, early
    and programs to support training of personnel             identification of nursing home or other collective living
    required to implement surveillance programs.              outbreaks, role of other facilities such as schools in the
    The Agency should facilitate the longer-term              event of large community outbreaks, linkage of infor-
    development of a comprehensive and national               mation systems in hospital emergency departments, etc.).
    public health surveillance system that will




                                                                                                                           i n
    collect, analyze, and disseminate laboratory           c. Developing standards for data gathering, and protocols
    and health care facility data on infectious               for data ownership, data sharing and dissemination.



                                                                                                                           H e a l t h
    diseases and non-infectious diseases to relevant       5.5 Through its own core budget and the
    stakeholders.                                              Communicable Disease Control Fund, the
5.4 Assuming some lag time to inception of a new               Canadian Agency for Public Health should
    Agency or F/P/T Network, Health Canada and                 support nosocomial infection control, including
    the provinces and territories should urgently              hospital surveillance, as a priority program.
                                                                                                                           P u b l i c


    commence a process to arrive at business process           Specific nosocomial infections should be
    agreements for collaborative surveillance of               deemed nationally notifiable, and surveillance
    infectious diseases and response to outbreaks.             for them supported by mechanisms for active
    The business processes for infectious disease              and passive laboratory surveillance.
    surveillance would be extended over time with
                                                                                                                           o f




    support from the Agency’s Centre for Surveillance
    Coordination and the Public Health Partnerships
                                                                                                                           R e n e w a l




    Program, to a national system for non-communi-
    cable diseases and population health factors.



..........................................................................................                         107
                  .................................................................................................

                  As is true for health care more generally, public health         • building an integrated F/P/T planning,
                  has under-invested in information technology for years.            training and exercising platform for
                  Other sectors such as banking and insurance make a                 responding to all-hazard disasters, including
                  several-fold higher investment in information technology           public health emergencies created by large-
                  as compared to health, notwithstanding the acceleration            scale disease outbreaks;
                  of investment in recent years. Through Canada Health
                                                                                   • developing and applying a common set of
                  Infoway Inc., the recent federal Budget provided
                                                                                     principles, concepts and capabilities for large-
                  $600 million in one-time only support to move ahead
                                                                                     scale disease outbreaks, and
                  with the creation of an Electronic Health Record.
                  Comparatively speaking, the needs of surveillance have           • creating the requisite linkages to major
                  not received much attention or funding. The presence of            employers, the travel and hotel industry, and
                  a national “blueprint” for health IT, with a concentration         relevant NGOs.
                  on the Electronic Health Record, highlights the need for
                                                                               We return to legal issues in Chapter 9. In this context,
                  an approach to health surveillance that is integrated with
                                                                               the Committee recommends that:
                  the clinical systems of the future. The Committee
                  accordingly recommends that:
                                                                               5.8 Health Canada in collaboration with provincial/
                                                                                   territorial jurisdictions should lead the develop-
                  5.6 The Government of Canada should seek the
                                                                                   ment of a national legislative and policy frame-
                      establishment of a working group under the
                                                                                   work for a measured, harmonized, and unified
                      auspices of the Canada Health Infoway
                                                                                   response to public health emergencies.
                      Incorporated and Health Canada and/or the
                      new Canadian Agency for Public Health, to focus          The Committee further recommends that:
                      specifically on the needs of public health
                      infostructure and potential investments to               5.9 F/P/T governments should develop and provide
                      enhance disease surveillance and link public                 training programs and tools to support local
                      health and clinical information systems.                     public health units and institutions in system-
                                                                                   atically developing, implementing, and evalu-
                  We have also highlighted the need to create collaboration
                                                                                   ating crisis and emergency risk communication
                  between public health emergency capacity, particularly
                                                                                   strategies.
                  outbreak management, and the broader emergency
                  response capability of F/P/T jurisdictions. The Committee    5.10 The F/P/T Conference of Deputy Ministers of
                  therefore recommends that:                                        Health should support the continued activity of
                                                                                    the F/P/T Network for Emergency Preparedness
                  5.7 The F/P/T Network for Emergency Preparedness                  and Response with a view to enhanced surge
                      and Response, in collaboration with the new                   capacities in all jurisdictions, including:
                      F/P/T Network for Communicable Disease
                                                                                   • developing an integrated risk assessment capa-
                      Control, should urgently move ahead with the
                                                                                     bility for public health emergency response;
                      development of a comprehensive approach to
                      managing public health emergencies through a                 • assessing the National Emergency Stockpile
                      pan-Canadian system that includes:                             System [NESS] to optimize its role in supporting
                                                                                     the response to large-scale disease outbreaks;
                      • harmonizing emergency preparedness and
                                                                                     and
                        response frameworks at the federal,
                        provincial and territorial levels;                         • developing and funding the Health Emergency
                                                                                     Response Team concept, including a psycho-
S A R S




                      • developing seamless planning and response
                                                                                     social response component, as a practical,
                        capacities as envisaged by the 31 recommen-
                                                                                     flexible mechanism for addressing the need
                        dations of the Special Task Force on Emergency
                                                                                     for human resource surge capacity.
                        Preparedness and Response;
f r o m
L e a r n i n g




                  108       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


Appendix 5.1                                                     Costing of a Surveillance System for Infectious
Costing of a Surveillance System                                 Disease & Emergencies
                                                                                                            $ millions p.a.
The costs below reflect, first, a reasonably comprehensive                                                  (average, over
system for the surveillance of reportable infectious diseases,                                                 5 years)
with the capability to link to front-line public health case
management systems, laboratory systems, and infection            CIPHS/i-PHIS
control systems. These systems only partly exist and will
need to be developed further. To satisfy the needs of            Collaborative                                   2.0
public health users and to meet the goals of the renewed
                                                                 Updates, pilots, rollout                        1.8
National Immunization Strategy, immunization and vaccine
adverse event reporting modules will need to be included.        Modules &/or links:
It is assumed that modules for disease syndromes and for           inspection/water                              0.4
mass quarantine will be included. Syndromic surveillance           non-infectious (basic)                        0.5
for bioterrorism is listed separately.                             lab (link)                                    0.3
                                                                   blood-borne infections (link)                 0.4
The costs are incremental, based upon the current state of         influenza                                     0.1
development of surveillance infrastructure and info-               quarantine                                    0.1
structure in the Population and Public Health Branch.              immunization/vaccine-preventable
                                                                   diseases/vaccine-associated adverse events    0.6
A second major component is an intelligence dissemina-           Lab systems development                         2.0
tion or health alert network system, not unlike that
recommended by the Canadian Medical Association in               Infection control system development            2.5
their submission. It would be developed gradually and
will ultimately resemble the CDC’s Public Health                 Architecture                                    0.4
Intelligence Network System. Portal-type capabilities
                                                                 Standards                                       0.7
allowing controlled access to a wide range of information
will eventually be included. It would provide a fully-           Policy Issues (privacy, data management)        0.4
featured secure system for high-priority users and a
simple e-mail/fax capability for general users.                  Local implementation                            7.0




                                                                                                                              C a n a d a
Total costs are shown: this would be shared in some              Subtotal                                        19.2
fashion (according to the type of expenditure, not by
                                                                 Bioterrorism
formula) between federal and P/T governments. Basic
                                                                    architecture/standards                       0.8
hardware and connectivity costs are not included.
                                                                    public health system development             1.7
                                                                    feeder systems development                   3.0
Costs are shown as average yearly costs over a five-year            implementation                               5.0




                                                                                                                              i n
period.
                                                                 Subtotal                                        10.5


                                                                                                                              H e a l t h
                                                                 Portal/Health Alert Network
                                                                    Consultation/design                          0.2
                                                                    IM/IT development, project management         2.3
                                                                    Component development                        0.8
                                                                    Implementation & operations                  10.0
                                                                                                                              P u b l i c




                                                                 Subtotal                                        13.3

                                                                 TOTAL                                           43.3

                                                                 Five-year total: $215 million
                                                                                                                              o f
                                                                                                                              R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                              109
                  .................................................................................................


                  Appendix 5.2                                                   Areas in Asia with Local Transmission
                                                                                 (March 29, 2003 21:00 EST)
                  Case Definitions for SARS from
                  Health Canada and Ontario                                      China, including Hong Kong Special Administrative
                                                                                 Region
                  I. Evolution of Health Canada’s SARS Case
                     Definition                                                  Vietnam: City of Hanoi

                  March 16: first case definition with a probable case           Singapore
                  being one who meets the suspect case definition “together
                  with severe progressive respiratory illness suggestive of      Taiwan [added]
                  atypical pneumonia”.
                                                                                 April 2: “Close contact* within 10 days of onset of
                  Comment section indicates signs/symptoms that may              symptoms with a suspect or probable case” is added to
                  characterize severe progressive respiratory illness and that   suspect cases definition.
                  “chest x-ray changes may or may not be present”.
                                                                                 May 14: Wording of Affected area changed slightly
                  • First Case definition included “Close contact* with a        “Recent travel within 10 days of onset of symptoms to
                    probable case                                                a WHO-reported “affected area” outside of Canada
                  • Recent history of travel (within 10 days) to Asia,           [previously in Asia]
                    especially in areas reporting cases of SARS (see below)
                                                                                 • Table of Areas, OUTSIDE OF Canada listed as “Affected
                                                                                   Areas” (with Local Transmission of SARS) included.
                  Areas in Asia Reporting Cases of SARS
                                                                                   Case Definitions stayed the same.
                  China: Guangdong province, Hong Kong SAR
                                                                                 May 29: Clinical criteria for a living suspect case stays
                  Vietnam: City of Hanoi                                         the same.

                  Singapore                                                      • addition of: “A person with unexplained acute
                                                                                   respiratory illness resulting in death after 1 November
                  March 17: “AND No other known cause of current                   2002, but on whom no autopsy has been performed”
                  illness” was added to case definition.                           added to suspect case definition
                                                                                 • Recent travel or visit within 10 days of onset of
                  March 20: “Persons under observation” is defined and             symptoms to a defined setting that is associated with
                  added to case definitions. Recent history of travel              a cluster of SARS cases changed to “Recent travel or visit
                  (within 10 days) to WHO-reported “affected areas” in             to an identified setting in Canada where exposure to SARS
                  Asia is added to suspect case definition (rather than            may have occurred (e.g., hospital [including any hospital
                  Recent history of travel (within 10 days) to Asia).              with an occupied SARS unit], household, workplace,
                                                                                   school, etc.).** This includes inpatients, employees or
                  March 21: Definition of Persons “under observation” is           visitors to an institution if the exposure setting is an
                  removed and added to website under “Public Health                institution.”
                  Measures”.
                                                                                 • link to Ontario site provided: “**The list of potential
                  March 31:                                                        SARS exposure sites in the Province of Ontario can be
S A R S




                                                                                   obtained at the following address:
                  • “Close contact* within 10 days of onset of symptoms            <http://www.health.gov.on.ca/english/public/updates/
                    with a probable case” is added to suspect case                 archives/hu_03/sars/exposure_sites_052703.pdf>”
                    definition.
f r o m




                                                                                 • Probable case definition changed: “A suspect case with
                  • “recent travel to a setting that is associated with a          radiographic evidence of infiltrates consistent with
                    cluster of SARS cases” is added to suspect case                pneumonia or respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) on chest
                    definition. This was added to capture exposure sites           x-ray (CXR).”
L e a r n i n g




                    within Canada (i.e., Toronto).




                  110       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

• ”Exclusion Criteria strengthened”
A suspect or probable case should be excluded if an
alternate diagnosis can fully explain their illness.

• Areas, OUTSIDE OF Canada listed as “Areas with
  recent local transmission” of SARS revised


 Chronology of Ontario SARS Case Definitions as per their website


 Date                    Website                     Probable Case Definition                          Suspect Case Definition

 April 11, 2003          http://ogov.newswire.       A probable case is someone who either             A person with a history of high fever
                         ca/ontario/GPOE/2003/       has chest x-ray findings of pneumonia or          (over 38 degrees C) AND respiratory
                         04/11/c0428.html?           Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome OR            symptoms including cough, shortness of
                         lmatch=&lang=_e.html        is a suspect case with an unexplained             breath, difficulty breathing AND no other
                                                     respiratory illness resulting in death, with      known cause of current illness AND has
                                                     findings of Acute Respiratory Distress            had close contact with a probable or
                                                     Syndrome of unidentifiable cause AND              suspect case of SARS or traveled to
                                                     has had close contact with a probable or          Hong Kong, Vietnam, China, Taiwan, or
                                                     suspect case of SARS or traveled to               Singapore in the last 10 days.
                                                     Hong Kong, Vietnam, China, Taiwan or
                                                     Singapore.

 April 29, 2003          http://ogov.newswire.       A probable case is someone who either        No change
                         ca/ontario/GPOE/2003/       has chest x-ray findings of pneumonia or
                         04/29/c5627.html?           Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome OR
                         lmatch=&lang=_e.html        is a suspect case with an unexplained
                                                     respiratory illness resulting in death, with
                                                     findings of Acute Respiratory Distress
                                                     syndrome of unidentifiable cause AND
                                                     has had close contact with a probable or
                                                     suspect case of SARS or traveled to




                                                                                                                                                         C a n a d a
                                                     Hong Kong, Vietnam, China, Taiwan or
                                                     Singapore in the last 10 days.

 May 26, 2003            http://www.health.gov.      A person meeting the suspect case                 A person presenting with a fever (over 38
                         on.ca/english/public/       definition together with progressive              degrees Celsius) AND one or more
                         updates/archives/           respiratory illness suggestive of atypical        respiratory symptoms including cough,




                                                                                                                                                         i n
                         hu_03/sars_stats/           pneumonia or acute respiratory distress           shortness of breath, difficulty breathing,
                         stat_052603.pdf             syndrome with no known cause OR a                 AND one or more of the following: 1)
                                                     person meeting the suspect case                   close contact* within 10 days of onset


                                                                                                                                                         H e a l t h
                                                     definition with an unexplained respiratory        with a suspect or probable case; 2) recent
                                                     illness resulting in death, with an               travel within 10 days of onset of symptoms
                                                     autopsy examination demonstrating the             to a WHO reported “affected area” outside
                                                     pathology of acute respiratory distress           of Canada (see WHO website for latest
                                                     syndrome with no known cause.                     information: http://www.who.int/csr/
                                                                                                                                                         P u b l i c


                                                                                                       sars/en/ ); 3) recent travel or visit within
                                                                                                       10 days of onset of symptoms to a
                                                                                                       defined setting that is associated with a
                                                                                                       cluster of SARS AND no other known
                                                                                                       cause of current illness.
                                                                                                                                                         o f




 * Close contact means having cared for, lived with or had face-to-face (within 1 metre) contact with, or having had direct contact with respiratory
   secretions and/or other body fluids of a person with SARS.
                                                                                                                                                         R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                                                         111
                  .................................................................................................


                  Appendix 5.3
                  Some Steps toward Achieving
                  Seamless Outbreak Management
                  in Canada
                  Either memoranda of agreement or legislative arrangements
                  should be developed among Health Canada and all P/T
                  jurisdictions laying out protocols covering all aspects of
                  the conduct of the management of significant outbreaks,
                  as below:

                  • agreement on roles and responsibilities;
                  • agreement on data ownership, custody, sharing; the
                    aim should be to facilitate greater sharing of data;
                  • prior agreement on the use of data for publication and
                    authorship must be included;
                  • clear identification of persons responsible for (a)
                    management of the outbreak, (b) data management,
                    and (c) communications;
                  • prior agreement on the general outline of information
                    management elements (standards, definitions, etc.),
                    based on accepted standards, with one person
                    responsible for authorizing elaborations of these
                    elements, and enforcing their use;
                  • development of a shared ‘B-team’ function, with
                    separate teams responsible for front-line outbreak
                    containment, epidemiology and data analysis, and
                    ‘sober second thoughts/hypothesis generation’;
                  • agreed strategy and workplan to ensure interoperability
                    of all information systems concerned with infectious
                    diseases in hospital and public health;
                  • sharing of information to be by access to a common
                    database rather than through transmission of data; and
                  • uniform adoption of highly flexible and interoperable
                    data platforms, that allow sharing of public health
                    information, capture of clinical information from
                    hospitals, and integration into an outbreak management
                    database platform.
S A R S
f r o m
L e a r n i n g




                  112       .........................................................................................
                                SARS and Public Health
Chapter 6


STRENGTHENING THE ROLE
OF LABORATORIES IN PUBLIC HEALTH
AND PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCIES
.................................................................................................



Laboratory issues were highlighted in briefs received from       • Participating in, conducting or coordinating
the Canadian Association of Medical Microbiologists, the           laboratory surveillance of infectious diseases
Canadian Infectious Diseases Society, the Canadian
                                                                 • Environmental surveillance
Society for Medical Laboratory Science, and the Ontario
Association of Medical Laboratories. The SARS experience         • Emergency preparedness and response
has clearly illustrated the central role that public health
                                                                 • Applied research and development
laboratories play in both public health and the health
care system. Serving sometimes as first-line testing             • Fundamental research
facility when a novel agent emerges, and at other times
as a reference centre or ‘court of last resort’ to standardize   While discharging these functions, public health labora-
and improve testing procedures for unusual pathogens,            tories are integrated with the wider public health team.
public health laboratories are a key resource in infectious      They play important roles in providing information for
disease diagnosis, surveillance, and epidemic response.          public health policy, training health human resources,
Public health laboratories also have potential functions         and public health research.
in chronic disease surveillance and diagnosis that could
grow in the years ahead as more links are established            A brief description of each of the key functions may
between apparently non-communicable diseases and a               provide the reader with a better understanding and




                                                                                                                                 C a n a d a
variety of pathogens.                                            appreciation of the role of laboratories in public health.


6A. Key Activities of Laboratories                               6A.1 Diagnosis of Infections
                                                                 There is a public health dimension to all communicable
Canada has a wide variety of medical laboratories,
                                                                 diseases and to some related infectious disease issues




                                                                                                                                 i n
organized variously under the ownership and management
                                                                 (e.g., nosocomial infections and antimicrobial resistance).
of investor-owned corporations, non-profit hospitals and
                                                                 In Canada, diagnostic services for infectious diseases can


                                                                                                                                 H e a l t h
health regions, or various levels of government in the
                                                                 be provided by private laboratories, hospital laboratories,
form of public health laboratories. The list of activities
                                                                 provincial laboratories or national laboratories. The most
below applies particularly to a public health laboratory,
                                                                 frequent infectious diseases, such as lower urinary tract
but other types of laboratories carry out some of these
                                                                 infections (cystitis), skin infections (impetigo, carbuncles,
functions:
                                                                 cellulitis), typical community-acquired pneumonias, and
                                                                                                                                 P u b l i c



                                                                 upper respiratory tract infections (pharyngitis, laryngitis,
• Diagnosis of infections
                                                                 sinusitis), are all diagnosed using microbiological tech-
• Characterization of micro-organisms                            niques available in private laboratories or hospital labora-
                                                                 tories. The role of private laboratories varies widely. In
• Reference services
                                                                 some provinces, they mainly provide diagnostic services
                                                                                                                                 o f




• Support to epidemiologic surveillance and epidemic             to community-based physicians. In others, they also have
  investigation                                                  a significant role in providing services to hospitals, and
                                                                                                                                 R e n e w a l




                                                                 major hospitals have developed public-private partnerships
                                                                 with investor-owned laboratory service providers.



..........................................................................................                               113
                  .................................................................................................

                  Less common infections are diagnosed in laboratories at          6A.4 Support to Epidemiologic
                  either the provincial or national levels. In cases of new             Surveillance
                  diseases such as West Nile virus and SARS, or rare
                  diseases such as Hantavirus and Ebola virus, the National        Almost all infectious disease surveillance involves a
                  Microbiology Laboratory [NML] at times takes on the role         laboratory test at some stage, as clinical diagnosis in and
                  of front-line diagnostic laboratory. This occurs when the        of itself is seldom deemed definitive. In Canada, national
                  NML receives specimens for testing directly from health          surveillance systems for different infectious diseases have
                  care institutions, a situation that arises when it is the only   evolved independently of each other, and are largely
                  laboratory in the country able to provide the required           stand-alone. The type of laboratory testing required for a
                  testing for reasons of economy of scale or requirements          given surveillance system determines where testing can be
                  for high levels of containment. In many instances, this is       done. For some infections (meningitis, Creutzfeldt-Jakob
                  a time-limited role as other laboratories become proficient      Disease [CJD]), all specimens are tested at the national
                  in testing for these rare or dangerous agents, or tests          level. For others such as influenza, initial isolation is
                  become commercially available. The NML may also play             performed at the provincial level and a sample is referred
                  a role in facilitating the adoption of new testing technology    to the National Microbiology Laboratory for sub-typing.
                  by hospital or provincial public health laboratories.            This practice extends to many areas such as surveillance
                                                                                   of vaccine adverse events (now being planned), vaccine
                  6A.2 Characterization of Micro-organisms                         failures or antiviral drug treatment failures.

                  Detailed characterization of organisms is a frequent             At times, the sampling frame for surveillance is systematic
                  function of public health laboratories. There are many           and at other times it is not. For some diseases, a labora-
                  important reasons for characterizing organisms associated        tory result generated on the front line or in provincial
                  with infection. These include gaining an understanding           laboratories becomes part of an epidemiologic report and
                  of a class of organisms’ susceptibility to treatments so that    contributes to a deeper understanding of a particular
                  appropriate treatment choices can be made, understanding         emerging disease or outbreak. New techniques have
                  the relatedness of organisms of the same class and thus          allowed ‘molecular finger-printing’ of organisms to
                  possible common sources of infection, and determining            establish their epidemiologic relationships, as in different
                  how an organism is causing disease and predicting risks          strains of the SARS virus. These techniques can also be
                  of infectious disease outbreaks. Different types of charac-      important in linking severity of infections to subtle
                  terization are generally performed by different types of         differences in viruses or bacteria that otherwise appear to
                  laboratories in the health care or public health system.         be part of the same family.
                  As with other areas of public health, this function has
                  suffered from a lack of coordination and problems with           Unfortunately, these types of activities are again not well-
                  data sharing.                                                    coordinated; Canada continually loses opportunities to
                                                                                   advance knowledge or improve its own management of
                  6A.3 Reference Microbiology                                      infectious diseases by failing to aggregate these data in a
                                                                                   coherent laboratory-linked surveillance system. As a
                  Reference microbiology includes activities such as confir-
                                                                                   corollary, while there is considerable laboratory input into
                  mation of the identification of rarer organisms, organizing
                                                                                   infectious disease surveillance systems, closer links are
                  and coordinating quality assurance, and proficiency
                                                                                   needed to surveillance in general. The case for better
                  testing programs. All laboratories require some kind of
                                                                                   integration of laboratory and epidemiologic activities in
                  reference function. Provincial public health laboratories
                                                                                   Canada was highlighted by multiple stakeholders, including
                  may provide this function for laboratories in their juris-
                                                                                   the Canadian Society for Medical Laboratory Science, the
                  diction and the NML provides reference microbiology
                                                                                   Canadian Infectious Disease Society, Canadian Association
S A R S




                  services to all provincial laboratories as well as some
                                                                                   of Medical Microbiologists, and the Ontario Association
                  international reference activities. In the absence of
                                                                                   of Medical Laboratories. As well, it is clear that better
                  resources for developmental work at provincial laboratories,
                                                                                   standardization of laboratory testing would improve the
                  reference microbiology has been provided by some
                                                                                   comparability of results, and mitigate either uncertainty
f r o m




                  academic hospital laboratories. Thus, Canadian reference
                                                                                   or the need for repeat testing.
                  laboratory systems are ad hoc and not well-coordinated.
L e a r n i n g




                  114       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


6A.5 Laboratory Surveillance                                    It is ultimately possible for all provincial laboratories and
                                                                some major academic medical centres to use common
Some types of surveillance are primarily laboratory-based.      technology platforms and typing procedures, and then be
West Nile virus is one example. The National Microbiology       linked in real time over the Internet to provide surveillance
Laboratory performed all testing of dead birds and              information on key infectious diseases. Multiple stake-
mosquitoes over the first three years; testing has since        holders encouraged the creation of this type of integrated
largely devolved to provincial laboratories. Other types        information platform. Persuading laboratory stakeholders
of surveillance that are primarily laboratory-based include     to participate in these types of systems is a matter of
molecular finger-printing of foodborne organisms, and           finding the right inducements or mutual advantages. As
determination of antimicrobial resistance.                      discussed below, a private US company, Focus Technologies,
                                                                was able to gain participation of many Canadian hospitals
Most laboratory surveillance systems are passive, that is,      in a system to monitor antimicrobial resistance simply by
they rely on submitted biologic material to make inferences.    providing continuous feedback to the hospital labora-
If patients with signs of a particular infection are not        tories from a shared databank. Similar inducements could
tested, or if they are tested in laboratories that are not      foster the creation of a national public health laboratory
part of a surveillance network, then information is lost.       system that would serve as an integral part of a seamless
Epidemiologists regard passive surveillance as flawed in        national public health system.
that it lacks a systematic sampling frame, clear definition
of denominators, and assurance that laboratory information      6A.6 Environmental Surveillance
can be integrated with standardized epidemiologic and
clinical information. The outputs of a passive surveil-         Food and water safety monitoring are key parts of the
lance system have limited utility. Canada needs more            laboratory surveillance system, as the Walkerton and
active laboratory surveillance with known sampling frames       North Battleford outbreaks have reminded us. This part
and better denominator data to strengthen our ability to        of the system is delivered very differently in different
anticipate, detect and respond to infectious disease threats.   jurisdictions. Water testing is often devolved to the local
                                                                level and responsibility is spread through different
More timely and sensitive laboratory surveillance for           ministries. Similarly, food safety testing is spread across
many infectious diseases is entirely feasible by marrying       provincial and federal agencies including Health Canada
advances in information technology with advances in             and the Canadian Food Inspection Agency.
molecular typing of organisms.
                                                                In general, food and water safety surveillance in Canada
Consider the current sequence of events for a reportable        is at a fairly rudimentary state of development. The BSE




                                                                                                                                C a n a d a
disease of national interest: a patient with a particular       situation in Alberta has forcefully demonstrated that
clinical syndrome presents to a physician. The physician        failure to adequately monitor food safety can be economi-
orders a laboratory test. The test is performed by a local      cally catastrophic for national industries. For environ-
private laboratory, or perhaps in a hospital laboratory.        mental monitoring, public health laboratories must be
The laboratory reports the test to the attending physician,     able not only to detect infectious agents, but also unusual
who in turn reports the case to local public health, and        toxins from non-infectious sources that may or may not




                                                                                                                                i n
this in turn is reported provincially and ultimately            be food- or water-borne.
nationally. This system can take from a few days up to


                                                                                                                                H e a l t h
several weeks before case counts cumulate to the national       6A.7 Chronic Disease Surveillance
level, and it is particularly weak for timely recognition of
multi-jurisdictional outbreaks.                                 While the public health laboratory system is largely
                                                                concerned with infectious diseases, there are some well
More timely detection can only be achieved through              established chronic disease surveillance systems—
                                                                                                                                P u b l i c



linking laboratories. The Canadian Public Health                screening for phenylketonuria and hypothyroidism, for
Laboratory Network [CPHLN] is putting such a network            instance—that may be performed by provincial public
in place for enteric diseases, bioterrorism and other           health laboratories. In other jurisdictions, these functions
events. Although it is several years behind the United          are provided by individual hospital laboratories.
States’ PulseNet, the enteric disease surveillance system,
                                                                The role of public health laboratories in chronic disease
                                                                                                                                o f




PulseNet Canada is close to being operational.
                                                                surveillance is likely to change in the near term. Two
                                                                decades ago, few physicians would have imagined that
                                                                                                                                R e n e w a l




                                                                peptic ulcer disease was integrally linked to infection



..........................................................................................                              115
                  .................................................................................................

                  with Helicobacter pylori. More and more chronic diseases       6A.9 Applied Research
                  now seem to be caused by infections or at least have
                  infectious cofactors. Human papillomavirus has been            As technology changes and new infectious diseases
                  linked to cervical cancer, and hepatitis viruses are major     emerge, an increasingly important role for public health
                  causes of hepatic cancer. At the same time, strong genetic     laboratories is applied research on the diagnosis and
                  risk factors for chronic diseases have been identified         detection of infectious diseases. This includes evaluation
                  (Brca genes for breast cancer). What may emerge is a           of new commercially-available diagnostic tests, development
                  new integrative approach to preventing chronic diseases.       of in-house diagnostics, and research aimed at answering
                  For example, instead of cytological screening for cervical     specific public health questions. As discussed in detail in
                  cancer with Pap smears, physicians and nurse practitioners     Chapter 10, the capacity for research in public health
                  may test for Human papillomavirus and genetic factors          laboratories has been weak for many years and has, if
                  that predispose to progression to cervical cancer in the       anything, eroded further in the last decade. This must
                  face of a chronic infection. Prions may turn out to be         be remedied.
                  involved in various chronic diseases. These developments
                  again highlight the need for a laboratory system that is       6A.10 Fundamental Research
                  integrated with the goals of both public health and
                                                                                 Fundamental research is a key activity for public health
                  clinical care.
                                                                                 laboratories for several reasons. First, fundamental
                                                                                 research has merit in its own right. Absent investments
                  Unfortunately, Canada has undertaken no national
                                                                                 in fundamental research capacity, Canada would not
                  planning for these types of novel programs and there is
                                                                                 have had the technology and expertise required to isolate
                  virtually no federal presence in these cutting-edge fields.
                                                                                 and sequence the SARS coronavirus so rapidly. Second,
                  The current window of opportunity will close quickly, as
                                                                                 public health laboratories have unique resources and
                  a variety of local screening programs and market-driven
                                                                                 their research facilities can answer important scientific
                  testing strategies appear. Ample room must be left for
                                                                                 questions of relevance to the health of Canadians. Third,
                  pluralism and innovation, but Canada should move ahead
                                                                                 the excitement of research opportunities will unquestion-
                  to develop a public health strategy that can anticipate
                                                                                 ably help to draw talent to public health laboratories.
                  and channel these new surveillance opportunities.
                                                                                 And, as the SARS experience has so vividly illustrated,
                                                                                 maintaining cutting-edge scientific expertise is important
                  6A.8 Emergency Preparedness and                                in the response to emergencies.
                       Response
                  Public health laboratories are tasked with preparedness        Significant involvement in fundamental curiosity-driven
                  and response to any infectious disease emergency or large      research is a public health laboratory function that has
                  epidemic. Related activities include participation in          withered. Most public health laboratories view basic
                  planning for emergencies (Viral Hemorrhagic Fever              science research as someone else’s job. Within Health
                  Emergency Response Plan, Pandemic Influenza Plan,              Canada, this kind of research was actively discouraged
                  Smallpox Plan), exercises, development of diagnostics,         until research became a clear part of the mandate of
                  training and equipping other laboratories, stockpiling of      Health Canada scientists with realignment in June 2000.
                  reagents, coordination of laboratory networks, provision       These mandates must be protected and expanded in the
                  of surge capacity to other laboratories and participation      new Canadian Agency for Public Health.
                  in biologic terrorism preparedness at special events (G8
                  Summit in Kananaskis and World Youth Day in Toronto)           6B. The Public Health Laboratory
                  and finally front-line response to infectious disease in
                  Canada and elsewhere. Many of these activities— e.g.,              System in Canada
S A R S




                  bioterrorism, West Nile virus, SARS—are new mandates           As noted, four levels of laboratories form the public
                  for public health laboratories. And very often the new         health laboratory system in Canada. These are private,
                  mandate is an unfunded one.                                    local and hospital laboratories, provincial public health
f r o m




                                                                                 laboratories, national laboratories and international
                  The Canadian Association of Medical Microbiologists and        laboratory networks. In some provinces, hospital and
                  Canadian Society for Medical Laboratory Science both           provincial laboratories are integrated. These different
                  emphasized the need for advance planning that would            levels of laboratories function as a hierarchy, although
                  provide the required capacity and funding for laboratories
L e a r n i n g




                                                                                 there are no formal reporting relationships or require-
                  to deal effectively with infectious outbreaks, bioterrorism,   ments. Usually, the sophistication and breadth of
                  or other workload surges.



                  116       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

diagnostic capacity and scientific expertise increases at        Front-line laboratories normally have a complement of
higher levels in the system. In an epidemic or an emer-          one or at most a few professional laboratory scientists
gency, these different levels of laboratories may be supple-     and a number of technologists. In major teaching
mented or complemented by laboratories that are primarily        hospitals, these laboratories are larger and may play a
based in academic institutions and whose primary role is         major academic role in training and research. In smaller
research. This was clearly the case in the Toronto SARS          centres, these laboratories may be supervised by general
outbreak, where, as noted in Chapter 2, teaching hospital        pathologists with very little training in microbiology.
laboratories took on the task of polymerase chain reaction
[PCR] testing to offload the Central Provincial Public           Although local and hospital laboratories initially identify
Health Laboratory.                                               many infectious disease outbreaks, their involvement in
                                                                 national surveillance systems is generally through their
The role of the different laboratory levels in surveillance      respective provincial laboratories. The hierarchical system
and response to an epidemic is dynamic, varying with             where biologic material is moved from one level in the
the disease or stage of an epidemic and with the state of        system to the next for more comprehensive testing is
development of diagnostics. For instance, for very               very cumbersome and slow. The closer to the front line
common diseases, diagnostics are usually available at the        that an infection can be diagnosed, the more timely the
first contact laboratory while for rare diseases diagnostic      detection of infectious disease threats will be.
testing may only be available at one laboratory.
Commercially available diagnostic testing is more likely         As already indicated, these front-line laboratories could
to be used at the local or hospital level while in-house         play a much greater role in infectious disease surveillance
diagnostics are more likely to be used farther up in the         and outbreak detection. They could be a part of a mecha-
hierarchy.                                                       nism for real-time sensing of infectious disease threats,
                                                                 and also play a key role in epidemic response. SARS was
6B.1 Front-line Laboratories (Private,                           primarily a nosocomial outbreak, but patients come from
     Local and Hospital Laboratories)                            and return to communities; infection control cannot stop
                                                                 at the hospital’s walls. A further reason for greater inte-
First-contact or front-line laboratories, which may be           gration of front-line laboratories into the public health
private, local or hospital-based, function primarily to          sphere is that, in major academic centres, these labora-
diagnose infections and are not technically part of the          tories have significant expertise that is essential for
formal public health system. However, there are public           creating a seamless public health network.
health obligations on them for the reporting of notifiable
diseases. The use of notifiable disease legislation is a major   Any move to achieve better integration and a more func-




                                                                                                                                 C a n a d a
mechanism for provincial laboratories and epidemiology           tional laboratory system will raise issues of standardized
programs to obtain data from front-line laboratories.            testing methods, information technology, data sharing
In addition, hospital laboratories are a key part of the         and funding. These issues must be faced and can be
response to institutional outbreaks of infection. In front-      managed. As one example of the necessary alignment of
line laboratories, specimens are mainly derived from ill         incentives, Focus Technologies Inc. successfully gained the
patients and are submitted for a battery of specific diag-




                                                                                                                                 i n
                                                                 participation of several Canadian hospital laboratories in
nostic tests. In general, these diagnostics focus on bacterial   monitoring antimicrobial resistance by a data-sharing
diseases and in many instances traditional technologies          scheme. Hospital laboratories provided data on anti-


                                                                                                                                 H e a l t h
are used. However, the testing technology varies with            microbial resistance to the company at no charge but
the interest, expertise and resources of the individual          were then able to view their institution’s antimicrobial
laboratories. Some front-line laboratories perform a             resistance patterns in comparison to others. The company
considerable amount of viral diagnostics as well.                later marketed the overall data. Focus is no longer active
                                                                 in Canada, but the precedent is important. Public health
                                                                                                                                 P u b l i c



Many front-line laboratory services for infectious diseases      authorities and health care administrators must work
have been privatized to achieve cost savings. This has           together to create the necessary incentives for institutional
created some problems since private laboratories are             participation in regional, provincial, and national
reluctant to perform many labour-intensive, low-profit-          programs.
margin tests. Privatization may also make it more difficult
                                                                                                                                 o f




to perform certain kinds of surveillance given the scope
of new federal privacy legislation (see Chapter 9).
                                                                                                                                 R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                               117
                  .................................................................................................

                  A start has been made on integrating front-line laboratories    Provincial laboratories face a number of challenges.
                  into the public health system, specifically in the area of      Their relationship with hospital and private laboratories
                  monitoring antimicrobial resistance, through the establish-     across the country is variable; it ranges from a quasi-
                  ment of networks for surveillance of antimicrobial              regulatory oversight role in Quebec to collaborative
                  resistance. Health Canada’s Nosocomial and Occupational         relationships or even competitive positioning in other
                  Infections Section has been successful in building close        jurisdictions. One reason for strained relationships is that,
                  links with leading specialists and institutions; further        whether owing to budget cuts to public health laboratories
                  networking is possible and has already been identified as       or advances in technology, hospital laboratories are now
                  a priority for action and funding in Chapter 5. As well,        undertaking more and more testing activities that were
                  the CPHLN plans to integrate local and hospital labora-         once fulfilled only by public health laboratories. This
                  tories into an envisioned three-tiered bioterrorism response    has led, in some circles, to a negative spiral as decision
                  network, with local and hospital laboratories playing a         makers infer that public health laboratories can indeed
                  key ‘sensor’ role. Thus far, these activities have progressed   be safely downsized. However, the resulting loss of
                  slowly because of a lack of resources. The funding              capacity to respond to emerging infectious diseases is not
                  programs of the Canadian Agency for Public Health               replaceable by private or hospital laboratories in the
                  (especially the Communicable Disease Control Fund) and          absence of a whole series of prior agreements with
                  the proposed F/P/T Network for Communicable Disease             these entities.
                  Control are both mechanisms to accelerate these
                  initiatives.                                                    The Committee’s view is that strong provincial laboratories
                                                                                  remain an essential component of the public health
                  6B.2 Provincial Laboratories                                    system. The Communicable Disease Control Fund and
                                                                                  F/P/T Network for Communicable Disease Control offer
                  All provinces have provincial public health laboratories        mechanisms for coordinated upgrading of these
                  with the exception of New Brunswick. In New Brunswick,          laboratories, with clearer definition of their roles in the
                  the functions of a provincial laboratory are performed by       referral hierarchy.
                  two different hospital laboratories. Provincial laboratories
                  operate within the realm of public health, but there are
                                                                                  6B.3 National Laboratories and National
                  many different models. In British Columbia, the provincial
                  laboratory is part of the British Columbia Centre for Disease
                                                                                       Laboratory Networks
                  Control [BC CDC] with integrated infectious disease             Within Health Canada, a number of laboratories are
                  epidemiology and laboratory programs. In Nova Scotia            involved in infectious diseases. The primary laboratories
                  and Alberta, the provincial laboratories are merged with a      are the National Microbiology Laboratory [NML] in
                  hospital laboratory. In Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Quebec,         Winnipeg, the Laboratory for Foodborne Zoonoses [LFZ]
                  Ontario and Newfoundland, organizationally and physically       in Guelph and the National Laboratory for Retroviruses
                  separate laboratories exist. Some provincial laboratories       in Ottawa. These laboratories all reside within the
                  have multiple sites within the province. These smaller          Population and Public Health Branch and would be part
                  laboratories would typically have a few professional            of the new Canadian Agency for Public Health.
                  microbiologists whose involvement in research and
                  development is relatively limited.                              These laboratories serve multiple functions including
                                                                                  front-line diagnostics (for new or rare diseases), reference
                  In every province, there are different relationships with       microbiology (confirming test results and quality
                  local academic institutions and hospital laboratories.          assurance), support to epidemiologic surveillance,
                  In this “system”, the functions and services provided by        conducting and coordinating laboratory surveillance,
                  provincial laboratories vary considerably. Among the            emergency preparedness and response, and applied and
S A R S




                  functions provided are reference services for local labora-     fundamental research.
                  tories within their jurisdiction, and primary diagnosis for
                  certain infections (often viral disease diagnostics are         The LFZ in Guelph focuses on the animal side of foodborne
                  centralized). The territories are served by provincial          zoonotics, while the Retrovirology Laboratory specifically
f r o m




                  laboratories under contract arrangements with Nunavut           deals with HIV and related viruses. The LFZ also has
                  being served by Ontario, the Northwest Territories by           laboratories in St.Hyacinthe, Quebec and Lethbridge,
                  Alberta, and Yukon by the BC CDC.                               Alberta.
L e a r n i n g




                  118       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

These laboratories have testing capacity that is generally      Communicable Disease Control and beyond. Not only
more sophisticated than the provincial laboratories, and        has F/P/T collaboration in the CPHLN been strong, but
are staffed by a significant number of PhD or MD trained        its importance was endorsed by non-governmental
scientists. In addition to the operations in Winnipeg, the      stakeholder submissions.
NML provides modest support to six national reference
centres based mainly in provincial laboratories. These          For provincial laboratory directors, the CPHLN offers
reference centres have developed for a variety of reasons       opportunities both to provide input to Health Canada’s
over the years; they provide specialized services not avail-    programs and to share expertise in a national peer-to-
able at the NML and have developed significant expertise        peer network. For the NML, the CPHLN provides a
in selected areas. For instance, the Alberta provincial         useful mechanism for communicating with and learning
laboratory provides national reference services for strepto-    from provincial laboratories, drawing on expertise that it
coccal infections. This model of shared F/P/T expertise is      does not necessarily have and implementing national
entirely consistent with both the vision for the distributed    programs. If CPHLN continues to be successful, ultimately
functions of the Canadian Agency for Public Health set          it could be a single point of contact between federal and
out in Chapter 4 and the anticipated workings of the            provincial public health laboratories for all work on
new F/P/T Network for Communicable Disease Control.             issues pertaining to infectious diseases.

As part of its role, the NML plays a key role in a cluster of   The NML houses and funds the CPHLN, but importantly,
federal and provincial laboratories that are part of Canada’s   it is chaired by a provincial laboratory director. The CPHLN
bioterrorism response. Because of the need to provide           is gradually beginning to coordinate federal-provincial
surge capacity to the provinces and front-line response         laboratory programming in a number of areas, key ones
anywhere in the world, two multidisciplinary laboratory         being bioterrorism, real-time molecular fingerprinting of
response teams have been established at the NML and             E.coli and Salmonella, and food and water safety. As all
equipped with portable laboratories capable of performing       jurisdictions move forward to strengthen the fabric of the
routine and molecular diagnostics in high containment.          nation’s public health systems, the CPHLN should in
One team is on call at all times and a team can be on the       turn be strengthened and expanded. Supported by new
way to the field in as little as three hours. The Canadian      federal funds and linked to the new F/P/T Network for
Association of Medical Microbiologists highlighted the          Communicable Disease Control, it should serve as
importance of such rapid response teams, particularly if        another exemplar for how national programs can be
they can combine laboratory and epidemiologic expertise.        planned and implemented in Canada’s complex multi-
The NML teams have been fully deployed only three               jurisdictional environment.
times—once to New Brunswick, once to Kananaskis, and




                                                                                                                               C a n a d a
once to Hong Kong to assist in the investigation of the         6B.4 International Laboratory Networks
Metropole Hotel and Amoy Gardens clusters of SARS cases.
                                                                Several international laboratory networks have arisen from
Provincial and hospital laboratories have their own unique      the need for combined firepower and rapid communi-
strengths, but do look to the NML for national leadership       cation among scientists in epidemic situations. Canada’s
                                                                national laboratories have extensive links to their




                                                                                                                               i n
in laboratory issues related to infectious diseases. The
NML provides coordination on a number of aspects of             counterparts in other countries.
laboratory surveillance across the country. A key develop-


                                                                                                                               H e a l t h
ment over the last two years is the establishment of a          Strong links to the US CDC exist for virtually all programs.
new working relationship with provincial laboratories           This has been enormously important over the years in
through the CPHLN. The CPHLN’s draft terms of reference         developing Canadian capacity. Canada, through the
are attached in Appendix 6.1. This body is made up of           NML and Defence R&D Canada at Suffield, Alberta, is a
the directors of the provincial laboratories; the Scientific    member of the US CDC-led Laboratory Response Network,
                                                                                                                               P u b l i c



Directors of the NML, the LFZ, and the National Retrovirus      charged with responding to the threat posed by biological
Laboratory; as well as leaders of the federal Centre for        and chemical weapons and related terrorist activities.
Infectious Disease Prevention and Control [CIDPC] and           The NML is also a member of the US CDC-based PulseNet,
the Centre for Surveillance Coordination and Response.          a molecular typing network for enteric pathogens. As
It is functioning increasingly as a national coordinating       noted above, PulseNet Canada is moving forward steadily.
                                                                                                                               o f




body, reflecting the modus operandi that the Committee          Recently, it was agreed that the NML and the CIDPC
hopes can be achieved more widely in the Network for            should create a formal liaison with the US CDC’s National
                                                                                                                               R e n e w a l




                                                                Center for Infectious Diseases; this is underway.




..........................................................................................                             119
                  .................................................................................................

                  Canada also participates in several different virology        been identified and the laboratory role shifted to one of
                  networks including the European Viral Diseases Network        diagnosis of coronavirus infection, development of
                  and the International High Security Laboratory Network.       diagnostic tests, and research on the agent.
                  The latter includes the level 4 laboratory programs from
                  Canada, the USA, Germany, France, Italy, the UK,              As the laboratory response developed, investigations into
                  South Africa, Australia, Japan, and Russia. After             the cause of SARS were highly centralized at the NML.
                  September 11, 2001, the Ministers/Secretaries of Health       The centralization of biologic material and laboratory
                  of the G7 countries and Mexico established the Global         results yielded a clearer picture of all the data on causation,
                  Health Security Action Group, which includes a laboratory     notwithstanding the disappointing lack of associated
                  network chaired by Canada, to respond to bioterrorism.        clinical and epidemiologic data. A further advantage of
                  This network’s ambit has now been expanded to include         unified leadership was that laboratory studies were
                  pandemic influenza.                                           readily coordinated, avoiding duplication and directing
                                                                                maximum effort at the most important issues. However,
                  Although the World Health Organization itself has no          predictably, moving specimens through the hierarchy
                  laboratories, it organized an international network of more   from hospital laboratory to provincial laboratory to
                  than ten laboratories responding to SARS, including all       national laboratory slowed down investigations. On
                  affected countries plus experts from some other countries.    occasion, specimens were received at the NML two to
                  The network led to unprecedented, extensive, and              four weeks after they were first obtained. For other
                  generous sharing of data and procedures. This resulted        individuals with probable SARS, reference specimens were
                  in very rapid progress on the laboratory front. The           never received at the NML.
                  international laboratory network exemplifies some of the
                  best practices and precedents from the SARS experience        During the early phases of the SARS epidemic there were
                  internationally.                                              several significant impediments to an effective laboratory
                                                                                response. The two most important were inadequate
                                                                                data management and the lack of clinical and epidemi-
                  6C. Analysis of the Laboratory                                ologic data.
                      Response to SARS
                                                                                Data management: The NML had no laboratory-wide
                  The laboratory response to identifying the causative agent    laboratory information system. In spite of many years
                  of SARS was one of the most visible parts of the epidemic     spent in developing a Laboratory Data Management System
                  response in Canada. The informal hierarchy identified         by Health Canada, the extant system could not serve the
                  above has not yielded a public health laboratory system,      epidemic response needs. A new database had to be created
                  and the extant arrangements were not well-structured for      from scratch, and was made accessible to laboratories in
                  investigating and responding to an outbreak. Instead,         the CPHLN over the Internet. This experience highlights
                  Canadian biomedical laboratories are structured to support    the need for software platforms that are agile, modular,
                  the diagnosis of infection in individuals. However, the       and rapidly modifiable for special purposes. More often
                  system was able to adapt to the different demands of the      than not, grand and purpose-built architectural designs
                  SARS outbreak. The inner workings of the NML likewise         in software development are overtaken by faster-moving
                  were not designed for an epidemic response, and changes       and smaller platforms that can be customized to the
                  in the way the NML operated were required for the             changing needs of users. The challenge, as always, is to
                  national laboratory to respond effectively.                   balance considerations of flexibility, economy, integration,
                                                                                and interoperability. For the future, laboratory databases
                  The ‘discovery’ phase of the laboratory response consisted    that can communicate with one another must be
                  of ruling out known agents as the cause of SARS and           established in public health laboratories across the
S A R S




                  identifying the causative agent. In doing this through        country. If a global system cannot be achieved, then at a
                  the CPHLN, agreement on the types of specimens to be          minimum a common information management system
                  obtained and specimen shipping protocols was reached          for outbreak responses should be established.
                  very quickly. The network agreed that testing for known
f r o m




                  agents would be performed at the provincial laboratories,
                  mainly Ontario and British Columbia, allowing the NML
                  to focus on unknown agents. The CPHLN was also able
                  to provide useful advice to scientists at the NML in
L e a r n i n g




                  directions for research. These steps were taken extremely
                  rapidly; within two weeks, the SARS coronavirus had



                  120       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

The lack of integration of epidemiologic and                    Once laboratory results of coronavirus testing became
laboratory data: As Chapters 2 and 5 have already               available, there were some new issues around reporting
highlighted, laboratory data were not well-integrated with      of results. Although results of testing were available, the
epidemiologic data during the SARS outbreak in Canada.          release of results to physicians and public health units
This objective has still not been fully achieved, with severe   was at times delayed in the Ontario Ministry of Health
adverse effects on research that will be further reviewed in    and Long-Term Care [OMHLTC]. We have not determined
Chapter 10. An integrated laboratory and epidemiologic          the extent or duration of these delays. The Committee
data management system is indeed achievable, at least           leaves it to the Campbell Investigation to determine the
for outbreak response. Such a system should have been           impact of these delays, if any, on the second wave of
in place before SARS, and must now be established as            SARS in Toronto.
soon as possible. This shortcoming points to the general
need for greater integration of laboratory and epidemiologic    A related difficulty arose from the fact that 172 individuals,
sciences in a renewed public health system.                     primarily from Ontario, tested positive for the SARS
                                                                coronavirus, but were not classified as probable or suspect
Once the potential causative link to the new coronavirus        SARS. As of mid-August it is still not known if these
became clear, the role of the NML shifted to performing         individuals actually had some form of the infection, how
diagnostic testing, development of further diagnostic           they acquired it, and if they produced additional chains
tests, supporting provincial and other laboratories with        of transmission. Collaborative work is currently underway
their own diagnostics, and reporting results. The NML           with the OMHLTC to pursue the matter. This information
initially provided coronavirus PCR primer sequence infor-       was and remains critical to determining whether there
mation to the CPHLN and engineered a positive control           was hidden community transmission of the SARS
for PCR testing. The plan of the CPHLN was to rapidly           coronavirus and describing the full spectrum of disease
devolve testing capacity to provincial laboratories.            caused by the virus.
However, at the same time, provincial, hospital and
academic laboratories began developing their own testing        The reporting of results to individual physicians was
based on published sequences of the coronavirus and             also problematic. For hospitalized patients who were
material obtained from ill patients. This resulted in some      discharged or died, results of laboratory tests were sent
chaos and duplication as individual scientists and              directly to medical records and in some instances were
laboratories went their own way.                                not seen by the physicians who cared for the patient.
                                                                This illustrates the inadequacies not only of laboratory
For example, several coronavirus genes from the same            information systems, but also the weak interface between
Tor2 isolate have been cloned and expressed multiple            public health and the health care system. In effect, no




                                                                                                                                 C a n a d a
times and are now being used in diagnostic tests across         system exists to pull important information together into
the country. On the positive side, the agile response of        a coherent picture of an outbreak. This situation again
hospitals and provincial laboratories is important and          illustrates that the data systems and business processes in
encouraging. On the negative side, the development of           place for managing day-to-day infectious disease problems
multiple diagnostics is somewhat wasteful and has led to        are ill-suited to responding to epidemics. Different




                                                                                                                                 i n
the proliferation of diagnostic tests that, notwithstanding     operational procedures need to be put in place urgently
a common genetic platform, may not have equal sensi-            for an effective outbreak or epidemic response.
tivity and specificity. Perhaps more importantly, when


                                                                                                                                 H e a l t h
multiple laboratories are providing testing in an
uncoordinated manner without sharing data, the ability
                                                                6D. The Ideal Public Health
to see the whole picture of the epidemic is lost. If this           Laboratory System for Canada
development had been anticipated, mechanisms for
coordination and reduction of duplication could have            Ideally, Canada should have a fully coordinated and
                                                                                                                                 P u b l i c



been put in place, along with a centralized database for        integrated national public health laboratory system that
all laboratory results.                                         delivers timely surveillance for infectious disease threats,
                                                                is an active participant in infectious disease prevention
This is yet another lesson from SARS. For the future,           programs, and responds effectively and quickly to
better coordination of efforts must be achieved through         infectious disease outbreaks.
                                                                                                                                 o f




extension of the CPHLN membership to major hospital
laboratories, the development of stronger provincial
                                                                                                                                 R e n e w a l




networks of laboratories, or both.




..........................................................................................                               121
                  .................................................................................................

                  Achieving this vision depends on strong regional or
                  provincial public health laboratories that are closely
                                                                                6E. Recommendations
                  linked to front-line laboratories and other organizations     The SARS experience has highlighted the importance of
                  involved in public health through funding streams,            public health laboratories in surveillance for infectious
                  collaborative agreements, common or related testing           disease and the central role of these laboratories in the
                  procedures, shared or interoperable information systems       response to epidemics. In some respects, the laboratory
                  and common programming. Such a configuration would            response to SARS went well. Its relative success was a
                  help to bring public health back into the health care         function of significant capacity at the national level,
                  system. These laboratories should be integrated with          effective F/P/T laboratory working relationships, pre-
                  epidemiologic components of public health in regional         existing functional networks, and a culture of mutual
                  or provincial agencies, helping to reinforce the second-      respect and assistance among the provincial and national
                  line of defence against public health hazards. As such,       laboratories. These prerequisites for success should be
                  they should be supported by the new Communicable              emulated in other parts of the public health system.
                  Disease Control Fund in the Canadian Agency for Public        We have identified a number of challenges and issues in
                  Health and linked together through both the CPHLN and         Canada’s public health laboratory system. The Committee
                  the new F/P/T Network for Communicable Disease                accordingly recommends that:
                  Control. These laboratories should also be closely tied to
                  scientists in academic institutions. Testing for important    6.1 The F/P/T Conference of Deputy Ministers of
                  infectious disease agents must be performed through               Health should urgently launch an expedited
                  common testing procedures at the lowest level possible            review to ensure that the public health labora-
                  within the integrated laboratory system, with results of          tories in Canada have the appropriate capacity
                  interest reported to the regional and ultimately the              and protocols to respond effectively and
                  national level in real time through integrated information        collaboratively to the next serious outbreak of
                  management systems.                                               infectious disease. The review could be initiated
                                                                                    through the Canadian Public Health Laboratory
                  Whenever possible, the regional laboratory would take             Network and engage with the new F/P/T
                  on leadership, coordination, and research roles in the            Network for Communicable Disease Control as
                  network rather than performing high volumes of testing            soon as the latter is operational.
                  on site. Expertise and innovation capacity should be
                  distributed across the network, with each regional labo-      6.2 Health Canada, in collaboration with the relevant
                  ratory developing national expertise in given areas, as           provincial/territorial authorities, should urgently
                  outlined earlier. The laboratory elements in the Canadian         initiate the development of a laboratory infor-
                  Agency for Public Health would be an integral part of the         mation system capable of meeting the information
                  network. In particular, the new federal agency must itself        management needs of a major outbreak or
                  maintain world-class laboratory science capacity, and its         epidemic. The laboratory information system
                  laboratory leaders in turn should have a mandate to build         must be designed in such a way as to address
                  regional public health capacity and play a major role in          the functional needs of laboratories, be readily
                  coordinating national surveillance and epidemic responses.        integrated with epidemiologic information,
                                                                                    and be aligned with data-sharing agreements
                  To achieve this vision, significant inducements need to           across jurisdictions and institutions.
                  be identified for front-line laboratories to become part of   6.3 The F/P/T Conference of Deputy Ministers of
                  regional laboratory networks and for provincial public            Health should launch a full review of the role
                  health laboratories to develop programs that fit into an          of laboratories in national infectious disease
                  integrated national system. The Communicable Disease
S A R S




                                                                                    surveillance systems, with the aim of creating a
                  Control Fund described in Chapter 5 would support                 more efficient, timely, and integrated platform
                  these aims, and the proposed F/P/T Network for                    for use of both public and private laboratories
                  Communicable Disease Control would lend momentum                  in surveillance.
                  to the integration of laboratory and epidemiologic
f r o m




                  functions.                                                    6.4 The Government of Canada, through the
                                                                                    Canadian Agency for Public Health, should
                                                                                    invest in the expansion of the Canadian Public
                                                                                    Health Laboratory Network to integrate
L e a r n i n g




                                                                                    hospital and community-based laboratories.
                                                                                    This includes alignment of incentives and



                  122       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

    clarification of roles and responsibilities for      The Committee also takes note of human resource
    infectious disease control. The relevant monies      shortfalls in the laboratory sphere, as outlined in
    could flow from the Public Health Partnerships       multiple stakeholder submissions. We discuss human
    Program or the Communicable Disease Control          resource matters in Chapter 7.
    Fund (see Chapter 5).
6.5 The Canadian Agency for Public Health should         Appendix 6.1
    give priority to strengthening the capacity of
    provincial/territorial laboratories as regards
                                                         Canadian Public Health Laboratory
    testing for infectious diseases. The Agency should   Network (CPHLN)
    provide incentives to increase the participation
    of provincial public health laboratories in          Draft Terms of Reference
    national programs. It should support provincial/
    territorial public health laboratories in the        1.0      Background
    creation of provincial laboratory networks           The Canadian Public Health Laboratory Network (CPHLN)
    equivalent to the Canadian Public Health             was organized in 2001 in an effort by provincial health
    Laboratory Network; these would connect in           laboratory directors who recognized a void in inter-
    turn to the national network. The relevant           provincial communication and in communication with
    monies would flow from the Communicable              the National Microbiology Laboratory following the
    Disease Control Fund.                                demise of TAC, and was coincidental to the terrorism of
                                                         September 11, 2001 and to the subsequent anthrax
6.6 The Canadian Agency for Public Health should
                                                         threats. In addition to addressing concerns regarding
    support participation and leadership in inter-
                                                         increased frequency and potential lethality of bioterrorism
    national laboratory networks by our national
                                                         agents, the scope of the Network was expanded to include
    laboratories, thereby building on the success of
                                                         other aspects of public health such as food and water
    the international collaboration in the response
                                                         safety in response to water quality problems in Walkerton,
    to SARS.
                                                         Ontario and North Battleford, Saskatchewan. At present,
6.7 Health Canada, in collaboration with provincial/     the Network is in the initial stages of its development
    territorial authorities, should sponsor a process    and is currently determining how best to provide leader-
    that will lead to a shared vision for the            ship in the development of a proactive network of public
    development, incorporation, and evaluation of        health laboratories that will serve to protect the health
    leading-edge technology in the public health         of Canadians. It is also considering how to positively




                                                                                                                       C a n a d a
    laboratory system. Among the issues that require     influence and support the broader Canadian health care
    elucidation are the role of national systems for     renewal initiative. The Network’s current mandate is to
    the real-time surveillance of infectious disease     develop and implement strategies to:
    through molecular fingerprinting of micro-
    organisms, toxicology capacity to detect illnesses   • Coordinate pathogen detection, infectious disease
    caused by the poisoning of natural environments        prevention and control;




                                                                                                                       i n
    and occupational hazards, and the potential for
                                                         • Conduct laboratory-based surveillance including the
    linking genetic testing and infectious disease
                                                           development of early warning systems to monitor and


                                                                                                                       H e a l t h
    surveillance in novel programs that would
                                                           detect emerging pathogens, antibiotic resistant
    target cofactors associated with the
                                                           organisms and outbreaks; and
    development of chronic diseases.
                                                         • Counter bioterrorist threats.
6.8 A national report card of performance and gap
    assessment for public health laboratories should
                                                                                                                       P u b l i c


                                                         The benefits envisioned by the CPHLN include:
    be developed through the Canadian Public Health
    Laboratory Network and/or the F/P/T Network
                                                         • A coordinated national laboratory response network;
    for Communicable Disease Control, allowing
    comparative profiling of various provincial and      • National standardization of laboratory procedures and
    national laboratories against international            quality assurance methods leading to greater
                                                                                                                       o f




    standards.                                             consistency of results;
                                                                                                                       R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                     123
                  .................................................................................................

                  • Expanded training available to Network participants                                 2.2 The vision of the CPHLN is to become an action-
                    regarding protocols, best practices and emerging                                        oriented national microbiology network providing
                    technologies;                                                                           value-added advice and services in direct support of
                                                                                                            the broader Public Health System.
                  • Enhanced national capability regarding the detection
                    of emerging pathogens, antibiotic resistant organisms                                      2.2.1     The CPHLN’s guiding principles are:
                    and outbreaks, and the prevention and control of
                                                                                                                         – leadership;
                    infectious diseases;
                                                                                                                         – stewardship;
                  • Reduced duplication of effort; and
                                                                                                                         – partnership;
                  • Enhanced support for laboratories through increased
                    collaboration.                                                                                       – integrated management;
                                                                                                                         – value of public health surveillance and
                  2.0     Mission, Vision and Guiding Principles                                                           early detection; and
                  2.1 The mission of the CPHLN is to provide leadership
                                                                                                                         – best practice.
                      in public health laboratory functions through the
                      development of a proactive network of public health
                      laboratories to protect the health of Canadians.                                  3.0          Strategic Orientation
                                                                                                        The following provides a graphical overview of the CPHLN
                                                                                                        strategic orientation. For more details concerning
                                                                                                        strategic priorities and strategic goals, refer to the CPHLN
                                                                                                        Strategic Plan.


                   F    I G U R E                  1
                   CPHLN Strategy                                                         Improved Health for Canadians
                                                       Strategic                                  Strategic Goals                                  Performance
                                                       Priorities

                                                   Human resources                   Promote the growth and development of a skilled
                                                      planning                       workforce for public health laboratories in Canada


                                                                                                                                                              CPHLN
                                                                                                                                                            2002-2005
                                                  Formalize and sustain
                                                 the national laboratory    Establish national laboratory network; Enhance information exchange
                                                   network role of the     & communications; Strengthen lab-based surveillance; Support national            An action-oriented
                                                         CPHLN             emergency preparedness & response; Develop and promote standards             national network providing
                                                                                                                                                          value-added advice and
                                                                                                                                                         services in direct support
                                    CPHLN 2002




                                                                                                                                                           of the broader Public
                                                                                                                                                               Health System
                                                   Advocate for and          Enhance capacity & capability of public health lab system; Support
                                                        develop            & communicate core mandate of PH labs; Promote benefits of efficient
                                                  better public health      PH laboratory services; Advocate strategies for better PH; Enhance
                                                     infrastructure                     focus on emerging issues and prevention
S A R S




                                                  Support and foster
                                                     high quality
                                                                                   Foster standards development based on best practices;
                                                    communicable
                                                                                      Develop the national reference services program
                                                  disease reference
                                                       services
f r o m




                                                 Facilitate and support
                                                 leading edge science,                Pursue research funding opportunities; Promote
                                                 research and training             the development of collaborations for better research;
                                                         activities                   Promote the improvement of training programs
L e a r n i n g




                                                                                                                                                    Feedback
                                                                                          Improved Health for Canadians


                  124      .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

4.0      Guidelines/Operating Principles                              – The Canadian Council of Chief Medical
4.1 The CPHLN shall work within the context of the                      Officers of Health (one representative)
    CPHLN Strategic Plan and reporting structure.             5.1.3   Members shall be appointed by their respective
4.2 The CPHLN shall respect the mandates and roles of                 organizations for a term of three years. The term
    all partners and work together in a way that will                 is renewable for an additional term of two years
    enhance their efforts.                                            at the unanimous discretion of the chair and
                                                                      vice-chair.
4.3 Where appropriate and feasible the CPHLN shall
    collaborate with international, federal, provincial,      5.1.4   In the event that a member resigns during his or
    and territorial agencies with a bioterrorism response             her term, a replacement for the balance of the
    or public health mandate, and participate on and/or               term shall be appointed by the representative
    communicate with related committees.                              organization.

4.4 The CPHLN will facilitate the coordination of             5.1.5   Members shall make a commitment to be actively
    existing public health committees by clearly                      involved in the work of the CPHLN, to make
    understanding the roles and mandates of the various               attendance at meetings a priority and commit to
    organizations involved in bio-terrorism response and              furthering the objectives of the CPHLN as defined
    other public health protection activities.                        by the strategic plan.
                                                              5.1.6   Members shall arrange to have a designate to attend
5.0     Governance
                                                                      meetings in the event that they are unavailable
5.1     Membership                                                    to attend.
5.1.1   The CPHLN shall be composed of no less than 13        5.1.7   Due to the responsibilities of the CPHLN to contri-
        and no more than 25 members, including the chairs.            bute to the minimization bioterrorism threats to
5.1.2   Members shall include the medical or scientific               the health and safety of Canadian, all members
        directors from the public health laboratories in              will be required to have Level II Secret Clearance
        each province, except Ontario which lacks a                   to maintain membership in the CPHLN.
        Medical Director for the Ontario Public Health        5.1.8   Any designate who attends a CPHLN meeting in
        Laboratories and will be allowed two                          the place of a member must have Level II Secret
        representatives, Health Canada stakeholders,                  Clearance.
        the Department of Defense Research and
        Development Canada, and the Canadian Council          5.1.9   Outside individuals are not permitted to attend




                                                                                                                            C a n a d a
        of Chief Medical Officers of Health as follows:               CPHLN meetings except at the invitation of the
                                                                      Chair and with appropriate consideration for
        – The Laboratory Director or designate of each                security clearance requirements.
          Provincial or Territorial Public Health
          Laboratory (maximum thirteen designates)            5.1.10 Loss of membership can occur by a vote by the
                                                                     CPHLN membership where the consensus of the
        – The National Microbiology Laboratory (NML),




                                                                                                                            i n
                                                                     voting members results in a vote to revoke a
          the Scientific Director General or designate,              particular membership. Reinstatement may occur
          plus designates from each of the following five            following a formal written request and a subse-


                                                                                                                            H e a l t h
          NML reference centers: Bacteriology, Zoonotic              quent consensus vote by the CPHLN membership.
          Diseases and Special Pathogens, Host Genetics and
          Prion Diseases, Enteric Pathogens, and Viral        5.2     CPHLN Leadership
          Diagnostics). (Six representatives)
                                                              5.2.1   The CPHLN shall be chaired by one CPHLN
        – The Department of Defense Research and
                                                                                                                            P u b l i c


                                                                      member in good standing. The term of the chair
          Development Canada (one representative)                     is one year. The vice-chair from the previous year
        – The Centre for Emergency Preparedness and                   will be automatically appointed chair for the
          Response (one representative)                               following year.

        – The Laboratory for Foodborne Zoonosis,              5.2.2   The CPHLN shall have a vice-chair held by one
                                                                                                                            o f




          Guelph (one representative)                                 CPHLN member in good standing. CPHLN members
                                                                      shall appoint the vice-chair for a term of one year
                                                                                                                            R e n e w a l




        – The Centre for Infectious Disease Prevention                at which point the vice-chair takes the position of
          and Control, Ottawa (one representative)                    chair for one additional term of one year.


..........................................................................................                          125
                  .................................................................................................

                  5.2.3   In the event that a chair should resign the vice-       5.4.4   The Secretariat shall be funded by Health Canada
                          chair will assume the position of chair and the                 through the NML until such time as permanent
                          CPHLN will appoint a new vice-chair.                            operational funds are established for the CPHLN.
                  5.2.4   In the event that a vice-chair should resign the        5.4.5   The Secretariat will provide support to and partici-
                          CPHLN will appoint a new vice-chair.                            pate in CPHLN meetings as required but will not
                                                                                          function as a voting member of the CPHLN.
                  5.2.5   The chair or, in his/her absence, the vice-chair
                          shall preside over CPHLN meetings.                      5.4.6   CPHLN meeting agendas shall be prepared by the
                                                                                          Secretariat, in consultation with the chair, and
                  5.2.6   The chair and vice-chair shall participate as
                                                                                          issued at least one week prior to meetings.
                          appropriate in the delivery of CPHLN submissions
                          to the Council of Deputy Ministers of Health            5.4.7   Minutes of CPHLN meetings shall be prepared by
                          and/or other jurisdictional bodies with a                       the Secretariat and distributed to Network members,
                          bioterrorism response or public health mandate.                 and other clients and partners as appropriate,
                                                                                          within two weeks of the meeting date.
                  5.2.7   The chair and vice-chair shall work closely with
                          the Network Manager and, through the Secretariat        5.5     CPHLN Meetings
                          staff to further the goals and objectives of the
                                                                                  5.5.1   The CPHLN shall hold semi-annual meetings to
                          CPHLN according to the strategic plan.
                                                                                          discuss and address business related to strategic
                  5.3     CPHLN Subcommittees                                             priorities, goals, objectives and initiatives; current
                                                                                          issues; communication flow; member relations;
                  5.3.1   The CPHLN shall create committees and
                                                                                          and funding and resource requirements, including
                          subcommittees as required, to address important
                                                                                          annual budget and operating plans).
                          public health laboratory issues.
                                                                                  5.5.2   Quorum for meetings shall be attendance by a
                  5.3.2   Subcommittee members shall be nominated and
                                                                                          simple majority of members.
                          approved by the CPHLN for a term of three years
                          (renewable). Where a subcommittee member                5.5.3   Decisions shall be made by consensus where
                          resigns during that term, a replacement for the                 consensus is defined as general agreement, either
                          balance of the term shall be appointed by the                   verbal or by poll. When consensus cannot be
                          Subcommittee and approved by the CPHLN.                         reached, decisions shall be made by a simple
                                                                                          majority of the members present. Each member
                  5.3.3   Subcommittee members shall have laboratory
                                                                                          receives one vote.
                          expertise in the particular area of focus of the
                          subcommittee and shall represent federal, provincial,   5.5.4   No decision by the CPHLN is legally binding in
                          territorial or regional laboratories. Subcommittees             anyway as the CPHLN is not established as a legal
                          will attempt representation from each jurisdiction              entity.
                          and geographic region.
                                                                                  5.5.5   Minutes will be recorded by the Secretariat and
                  5.4     CPHLN Secretariat                                               distributed to members.
                  5.4.1   A dedicated Secretariat shall be established at the     5.5.6   Agenda items should be forwarded to the Secretariat
                          NML in Winnipeg, to administer and facilitate                   no later than one month prior to the meeting.
                          the work of the CPHLN.
                                                                                  5.5.7   The agenda and required material will be circulated
                  5.4.2   The Secretariat will consist of a Network Manager               at least one week in advance of the meeting.
                          and a Scientific Information Officer and Standards
                                                                                  6.0     CPHLN Terms of Reference
S A R S




                          Officer who shall report to the Network Manager.
                          Other staff may be hired as required to the             6.1 Minor amendments to the Terms of Reference may
                          Secretariat based on the advice of the Network              be made by the Chair subject to ratification by the
                          Manager, endorsement by the CPHLN membership                members at the next meeting of the CPHLN.
f r o m




                          and availability of the required funds.
                                                                                  6.2 The Terms of Reference may be amended at any
                  5.4.3   The Secretariat shall report to the CPHLN chair             meeting of the CPHLN by consensus or by vote.
                          and be administered on a day-to-day basis by the
                          Scientific Director General of the NML or his/her
L e a r n i n g




                          designate.




                  126       .........................................................................................
                               SARS and Public Health
Chapter 7




PUBLIC HEALTH HUMAN RESOURCES
.................................................................................................



Public health, like other aspects of the health care system,    The Committee took particular note of the very wide
relies on a highly skilled workforce as its most valuable       range of stakeholders who commented on the challenges
resource. Although sufficient funding and an effective          of human resources in public health. Among them were
organizational structure are necessary ingredients in a         the Association of Nursing Directors and Supervisors of
flourishing public health system, the quality of Canada’s       Ontario Health Agencies [ANDSOOHA], Canadian Hospital
public health will ultimately rest on the shoulders of its      Epidemiology Committee, Canadian Medical Association,
public health workers.                                          Canadian Public Health Association, Canadian Infectious
                                                                Disease Society, Ontario Hospital Association, National
Over the last decade, various task forces and academic          Specialty Society for Community Medicine, Canadian
reports have usefully addressed issues related to the supply    Pharmacists Association, Canadian Association of Medical
of health professionals and technologists. The focus of         Microbiologists, Canadian Society for Medical Laboratory
most of these studies, however, has been on the human           Science, Canadian Association of Emergency Physicians,
resources necessary for the provision of personal health        Community and Hospital Infection Control Association
services. These reports have also served as the basis for       of Canada, and front-line nurses and support staff
intergovernmental agreements; for example, the 2003 First       interviewed in focus groups arranged by Health Canada’s
Ministers’ Health Accord states that “appropriate planning      Office of Nursing Policy.
and management of health human resources is key to




                                                                                                                               C a n a d a
ensuring that Canadians have access to the health providers     Some human resource issues raised by stakeholders rest
they need… Collaborative strategies are to be undertaken        more in the matter of operational and institutional policy,
to … ensure the supply of needed health providers (including    such as the right to refuse dangerous work mentioned in
nurse practitioners, pharmacists and diagnostic technolo-       Chapter 9, or pay for time in quarantine. Our focus in
gists).” The 2003 federal Budget allotted $90 million over      this chapter is on the capacity side: Does Canada have




                                                                                                                               i n
five years for health human resources, but no funds were        enough skilled personnel in various public health fields,
earmarked specifically for the public health workforce.         and if not, how can the nation close these gaps?



                                                                                                                               H e a l t h
A shortfall in public health human resource planning and        Although the major focus of this chapter is to discuss how
development was recognized in the Survey of Public Health       human resources issues affect public health functions like
Capacity in Canada, a report to the F/P/T Deputy Ministers      health promotion and outbreak management, it seemed
of Health by the Advisory Committee on Population               salient to recognize the impact the SARS outbreak had on
Health. As we noted in Chapter 3, this report was neither       education, and thus the impact future public health crises
                                                                                                                               P u b l i c



formally endorsed nor taken as a basis for action.              could have on health human resources. We accordingly
                                                                begin by describing how the SARS outbreak affected the
In this chapter, relying partly on the aforementioned           education of health sciences students. We then present a
Capacity report as well as expert opinion, stakeholder input,   brief review of information about the supply of public
and existing sectoral surveys, we present a brief assessment    health professionals in Canada. Moving past the numbers,
                                                                                                                               o f




of the public health workforce in Canada. The paucity of        we touch on issues about education and qualifications—
data on public health human resources, analogous to the         are our public health professionals appropriately trained
                                                                                                                               R e n e w a l




limited data on public health spending, illustrates that        for their work? Finally, we discuss strategies to strengthen
insufficient attention has been paid to this field.             the public health workforce and present a set of
                                                                recommendations.

..........................................................................................                             127
                  .................................................................................................

                                                                                Most resident physicians (i.e., doctors completing their
                  7A. The Effect of SARS on                                     specialty training) continued their usual work, albeit with
                      Professional Education                                    restrictions on inter-hospital movement. Although many
                                                                                felt understandably anxious about having to resuscitate
                  Post-secondary institutions in Toronto and elsewhere coped    or intubate a SARS patient, the vast majority of residents
                  with the unprecedented and unanticipated challenges           viewed themselves as integral members of the health care
                  posed by the SARS outbreak. Exams proceeded as scheduled,     team, and willingly volunteered to care for SARS patients.
                  and no student lost a year or had their program prolonged     Nevertheless, clinical teachers generally sought to limit
                  due to SARS. Nevertheless, clinical training programs for     the exposure of resident physicians to SARS and took the
                  various disciplines were seriously interrupted in Toronto     position that residents should be kept off primary SARS
                  as administrators were forced to devise and then amend        unit duty. Educators and ethicists would be well advised
                  policies on an ad hoc basis. Nursing students and educators   to discuss the role of health professional students and
                  in focus groups described the challenge of searching for      trainees in confronting risks posed by dangerous
                  timely and reliable information, and the need for a better    infectious diseases, and frame guidelines for the next
                  communications strategy in future outbreaks. Hundreds         outbreak of SARS or a similar organism.
                  of students and teaching staff, especially those situated
                  in hospitals, had to deal with uncertainty and stress. A      In the end, SARS had only a minimal negative impact on
                  number of medical students and resident physicians were       the education of the next generation of nurses, doctors
                  quarantined during the outbreak. One medical student          and other health professionals. Some of its impacts were
                  developed SARS but recovered rapidly. In addition to          presumed to be positive, as health professionals-in-training
                  interfering with clinical education, SARS disrupted work      saw firsthand the importance of public health and
                  at hospital-based research institutes and the progress of     clinical infection control. However, the potential impact
                  graduate students in those environments.                      of a public health crisis on the health human resource
                                                                                pipeline is obvious. Training institutions should heed
                  SARS had perhaps its largest impact on continuing             SARS as a warning and better prepare themselves for
                  education for qualified health professionals and health       future disruptions. This includes developing emergency
                  researchers. A dramatic bellwether was the cancellation       plans in collaboration with health care facilities that offer
                  on two days notice of a long-anticipated meeting of the       clinical teaching and with local public health units.
                  American Association for Cancer Research in Toronto.
                  There were 16,000 registrants and local organizers had
                  worked for years on the event. Similar cancellations          7B. Current Supply of Public
                  affected scores of other health education and research            Health Professionals
                  meetings, as part of the general decimation of the
                  convention and conference business in the GTA.                Our assessment of the state of public health human
                                                                                resources in Canada is limited by sparse data. For example,
                  Issues also arose with local meetings because of increased    public health human resources have not been well
                  risks inherent when health professionals from different       characterized in either the Canadian Medical Association
                  institutions congregate. This response was rooted less in     or the Canadian Institute for Health Information [CIHI]
                  personal fears of SARS itself, but rather a broader concern   databases. Sectoral studies sponsored by Human
                  that one infected individual attending a continuing           Resources Development Canada have not focused on
                  education event could force all other attendees into          public health. Other interested parties, including the
                  quarantine. For example, when all of Toronto’s cardiac        F/P/T Advisory Committee on Population Health, have
                  surgeons and others from across Canada met for a day of       also concluded that there is little quantitative information
                  continuing education during the second wave of the            on the state of public health human resources in Canada.
S A R S




                  SARS outbreak, attendees worried that a catastrophic
                  disruption in cardiac surgery services would occur if just    7B.1 Public Health Physicians
                  one attendee were infected with SARS and others were
                  forced into quarantine. The outbreak unquestionably           The number of doctors engaged in the practice of public
f r o m




                  lent new momentum to the use of distance-based                health in Canada is difficult to quantify. Canada has
                  educational methods for health professionals.                 about 400 community medicine specialists (physicians
                                                                                who have completed a course of post-graduate education,
                                                                                passed examinations, and maintain professional compe-
L e a r n i n g




                                                                                tence according to Royal College of Physicians and




                  128       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

Surgeons of Canada standards), as well as an unknown                        Vacancy data are not particularly reliable because physicians
number of physicians with other relevant public health                      working part-time or without formal qualifications occupy
qualifications (e.g., a master’s degree, a diploma, etc.).                  many of the filled positions. The National Specialty
                                                                            Society for Community Medicine points out that 8 of 37
Approximately 135 local or regional health departments                      health units in Ontario do not currently employ a full-time
employ a total of roughly 150 medical officers of health                    medical officer of health. The need for additional public
[MOH] and associate medical officers of health [AMOH].                      health physicians is most acute in rural areas, the Atlantic
Governments also employ some of these physicians                            provinces, the territories and areas served by Health
directly. Table 1 shows medical officer of health positions                 Canada’s First Nations and Inuit Health Branch [FNIHB].
based on a recent survey of Chief Medical Officers of                       Because of human resource constraints, some Canadian
Health across Canada. Simple math indicates that a large                    provinces simply cannot require that medical officers of
number of doctors have been trained in community                            health have formal public health qualifications. In Ontario,
medicine or public health but are not actively working in                   where specific requirements have been legislated, many
the public health sphere—including academics, those                         health units are forced to rely on acting medical officers
practising occupational or international health, those                      of health, who can be hired without the full set of formal
engaged in clinical practice, and retirees.                                 qualifications required of medical officers of health.

                                                                                        The Committee intends no criticism of those
  T    A B L E          1                                                               physicians without full specialist credentials
                                                                                        now working as medical officers of health.
  Public health physicians employed in provincial or municipal positions
                                                                                        These individuals are bulwarks of a strained
  in Canada.
                                                                                        system. Instead, we wish to highlight that
 Province/              Ministry-         MOH              AMOH         Population1     Canada faces a shortage of public health
 Territory             employed                                                         specialist physicians with contemporary
                                                                                        qualifications.
 NF                          1               6                0             531,145
                                                                                        Objective information on the age of the
 PEI                         1               0                0             140,412
                                                                                        medical officer of health workforce is currently
 NS                          2               4                1             944,456     being collected; preliminary results show that
                                                                                        up to 31% of public health physicians in MOH
 NB                          1               5                0             756,368     positions will retire in the next 10 years.




                                                                                                                                            C a n a d a
 QC                          5              35                0           7,467,626     The educational pipeline currently has
                                                                                        limited capacity. The usual route to public
 ON                         11              37               11         12,109,514
                                                                                        health specialization for a doctor is five years
 MB                          2              15                1           1,150,564     of training after medical school. However,
                                                                                        Canada has only 11 residency positions each
 SK                          2              10                3           1,009,225




                                                                                                                                            i n
                                                                                        year for community medicine training. In
                                                                                        2003, only 7 spots were offered in a pool for
 AB                          2               9                5           3,134,286     graduating medical students outside Quebec.


                                                                                                                                            H e a l t h
 BC2                         8              22                6           4,155,779
                                                                                        Even more important than the limited
 NU                          2               0                0              28,955     number of training spots is the proportion of
                                                                                        community medicine residents who actually
 YK                          1               0                0              29,841     work in public health after completing their
                                                                                                                                            P u b l i c



                                                                                        specialty training. This is variously described
 NWT                         2               0                0              41,389     by the three largest programs as “most”,
                                                                                        “very few”, and “about half”. Only a handful
 Total                      40             143               27         31,499,560
                                                                                        of Canadian-trained physicians, therefore,
 1. Population figures based on Statistics Canada preliminary post-census estimates     enter the public health workforce each year.
                                                                                                                                            o f




    for 1996.                                                                           A few more public health physicians are
 2. Data for British Columbia include 6 MOHs at the British Columbia Centre for
    Disease Control.                                                                    recruited from countries like the United
                                                                                                                                            R e n e w a l




                                                                                        Kingdom and South Africa each year but
                                                                                        overall, the supply pipeline remains extremely


..........................................................................................                                          129
                  .................................................................................................

                  constrained. Preliminary survey results show that 83% of                     Shortages are reported in rural, remote and First Nations
                  public health physicians believe that there should be                        locations. For example, about 50% of FNIHB’s nursing
                  more residency positions, and 87% support easier re-entry                    positions were reported to be unfilled two years ago.
                  into post-graduate training for doctors already practising                   Overall, our best estimate is that the shortage of nurses
                  family medicine or another specialty.                                        for public health positions is similar to that for other
                                                                                               nursing specialties. Some would argue that the situation
                  Compensation is frequently cited as a barrier to recruit-                    might actually be better in public health. The hours and
                  ment and retention of public health physicians. Whether                      nature of the work and the relative independence in
                  compensation-related or not, interest in the specialty is                    decision making make these positions attractive choices
                  limited.                                                                     for many nurses. To quote one interview participant,
                                                                                               “It’s easy to find applicants to recruit, especially with
                  In Quebec, public health physicians are able to bill the                     nurses wanting to leave the poor conditions of acute
                  provincial health insurance program on a sessional basis                     care, and move to Monday to Friday schedules.” On the
                  instead of receiving a salary from the public health                         other hand, Committee informants reported that nurses
                  department. This arrangement, along with a provincial                        are demoralized by a mismatch between funding and
                  strategy of self-sufficiency in health human resources, has                  service demands. One public health nurse observed that:
                  given Quebec many more physicians working in public                          “There is an increased expectation to do more with less.
                  health departments than elsewhere in the country—more                        This expectation is becoming increasingly
                  than 140 specialists are registered with the Quebec                          unmanageable.”
                  Association of Community Health Physician Specialists.
                                                                                               Nursing recruitment into public health is particularly
                  Relatively poor remuneration is not the only drawback to                     difficult in rural and remote northern areas. Remote
                  working as a public health physician. Other potential                        northern areas have the unique challenge of extreme
                  disincentives are the challenges of working in a political                   social isolation, although turnover in rural and northern
                  and bureaucratic environment and bearing ultimate                            areas is reportedly low. Remote areas that have retained
                  responsibility for the health of thousands of citizens in a                  experienced public health nurses for long periods now
                  particular region.                                                           face the challenges associated with an aging workforce.
                                                                                               Nurses new to the north need opportunities to develop
                  7B.2 Public Health Nurses1                                                   the breadth of skills and depth of knowledge needed to
                                                                                               practice independently. Funds and mechanisms for
                  Public health nurses are the single largest group of                         continuing education are therefore an important part of
                  professionals in the public health workforce. By most                        retention and career development for public health
                  estimates they account for almost one-third of the total                     nurses in remote areas.
                  public health human resources. Experts estimate that
                  there are approximately 12,000 public health nurses in                       In some jurisdictions, the restructuring of health systems
                  Canada. (CIHI reports 21,334 in 2002, but this figure                        has resulted in the integration of public health staff and
                  includes nurses working in community health centres,                         budgets with those for patient care. Integration may also
                  day care centres, and several other settings).                               include one collective agreement for all nurses employed
                                                                                               by the regional authority. This has contributed to identity
                  The Canadian Nurses Association has noted that the                           loss for public health nurses. As one individual told the
                  number of registered nurses in Canada rose from 113,000                      Committee, “A frustrating by-product of regionalization
                  in 1966 to 262,000 in 1991, but was only 253,000 in                          is that public health nursing has no central leadership, no
                  2001. The Canadian Nurses Association estimates that                         one to address broad public health nursing mandates.”
                  Canada will be short 7,000 registered nurses by 2011 and
S A R S




                  113,000 by 2016. Some experts suggest that Canada                            A related problem is the reintroduction of “integrated
                  is already short 16,000 nurses. Unfortunately, infor-                        practice” or “community health nursing”, where the
                  mation about the nursing workforce is not collected in a                     distinction between traditional public health nursing and
                  way that makes it possible to extract data on public                         individual care is blurred. Where a nurse is responsible
f r o m




                  health nurses.                                                               not only for community health promotion, but also for
L e a r n i n g




                  1 Information for this section was obtained by Health Canada through 13 key informant interviews, 20 survey responses (from a convenience sample),
                    and a non-exhaustive literature review. Interviews and surveys reflected input from British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Ontario, Nova Scotia
                    and Newfoundland and Labrador. Urban, rural and remote perspectives were captured. Respondents included public health nurses, administrators,
                    educators, and consultants.



                  130         .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

home care or ambulatory clinic care, limited public            manage a regional public health laboratory. The adver-
health resources may end up diverted into other areas of       tisement sought applicants with a knowledge of bacteriology,
the health care system.                                        virology, mycology, parasitology and serology who had
                                                               an MSc or PhD from a university of “recognized standing”,
The crucial work that public health nurses perform is          demonstrated managerial experience, highly developed
sometimes invisible. The submission by the ANDSOOHA            interpersonal skills, and a willingness to travel. The
spoke eloquently to the essential role of public health        salary range was $60,000 to $77,000.
nurses during the SARS outbreak, but these contributions
have received little public attention. Indeed, the Committee   PhD-trained microbiologists are critically important in
heard repeatedly that public health nurses feel that           staffing reference laboratories and research centres. The
governments, the public, other health professionals, and       Committee did not have a detailed inventory of training
perhaps most discouragingly, nurses in other sectors are       opportunities and output of research scientists who have
insufficiently aware of the contribution of the public         the capacity to play a role in cutting-edge laboratory
health nurse.                                                  activities that will lead to better diagnostic and therapeutic
                                                               capacity for emerging infectious diseases. However, we
Public health employers currently use a wide variety of        are concerned that these highly-skilled personnel are not
recruitment and retention strategies to entice nurses into     being trained, recruited, and retained in sufficient numbers.
public health practice. In addition to better compensation
packages, employers use recruitment strategies such as         Aside from the recurring theme of rural undersupply, the
offering funds for continuing education, advertising           supply of technologists is more or less adequate at present.
campaigns, establishing wellness projects designed to          However, this is partly a function of recent trends to
enhance the work environment, and implementing moni-           mechanization and centralization of laboratory functions,
toring tools like exit interviews. In some cases, however,     but these trends have reduced the number of full-time
recruitment strategies themselves have been compromised        positions and may have ripple effects on longer-term labour
by budget cuts.                                                supply. The Canadian Society for Medical Laboratory
                                                               Science [CSMLS] notes that “Half of Canada’s medical
7B.3 Laboratory Personnel                                      laboratory technologists will be eligible to retire by
                                                               2016…Thirty per cent of medical laboratory technologists
Working behind the front lines, laboratory personnel are       work part time. The number of part-time positions
essential members of the public health workforce as the        reflects the cutbacks in laboratory staff that have taken
preceding chapter indicated.                                   place in institutional workplaces, which in turn have an
                                                               impact on the ability to recruit new people into the field.”




                                                                                                                                C a n a d a
Medical microbiologists are in very high demand. As with       CSMLS estimates that 281 new training positions are
community medicine, there are few residency positions          required based on current demands and demographics
for MD-prepared medical microbiologists, and available         in their discipline.
spots often go unfilled. PhD-trained microbiologists are
also in short supply, and the erosion of public health
                                                               7B.4 Infection Control Practitioners and
laboratories has limited the attractiveness of this career




                                                                                                                                i n
stream. Even were the applicant pool large enough to
                                                                    Hospital Epidemiologists
replace those who retire—and most expert informants            Infection control practitioners—The US recommen-


                                                                                                                                H e a l t h
believe that it is not—newly-qualified persons rarely have     dation for the provision of trained hospital infection
the additional skills essential (e.g., epidemiology and        control practitioners [ICP] is one per 250 active care beds.
management training) for public health work. Unlike            More recently, the Infection Control Alliance (an alliance
the United States, Canada has no formalized post-              between the Canadian Infectious Disease Society, the
doctoral program providing for medical microbiologists         Community and Hospital Infection Control Association
                                                                                                                                P u b l i c



interested in a public health career.                          and Health Canada) has recommended a ratio of one ICP
                                                               per 175 active care beds. Forty-two percent of Canadian
The alignment of responsibilities and salary remains an        hospitals fail to meet the former standard, and 80% cannot
issue. The Canadian Association of Medical Microbiologists     attain the latter. Health Canada has been considering
commented on “the lack of competitive financial remu-          even more stringent standards; these envisage one practi-
                                                                                                                                o f




neration in the public health sector.” For example, in         tioner per 115 acute beds, and one per 250 long-term
August 2003, the Committee noted that a provincial             beds. These ratios would drop further for institutions
                                                                                                                                R e n e w a l




government was advertising for a laboratory specialist to      with critical care beds. Given our hospitals' inability to




..........................................................................................                              131
                  .................................................................................................

                  meet the current standard, it is obvious that they will be     Surge capacity—Severe understaffing of Toronto-area
                  unable to come close to the new Health Canada                  hospitals from an infection control standpoint became
                  standard. This suggests a massive shortfall in the number      clear during the SARS outbreak. As noted in Chapter 2,
                  of infection control practitioners necessary to provide        even if the government had ordered hospitals to conduct
                  optimum infection control in the hospital sector.              comprehensive syndromic surveillance after the first
                                                                                 wave of SARS cases, most hospitals would not have been
                  Infection control practitioners are mostly either nurses       able to operate such a program without outside help.
                  (88%) or laboratory technologists (10%) who learn on           During outbreaks, when multiple institutions are affected
                  the job. Fifty-five percent are certified—usually by the       simultaneously, the problems inherent in sharing infection
                  Certification Board of Infection Control and Epidemiology      control practitioners and directors among institutions also
                  in the United States. Certification requires two years’        become apparent.
                  experience, learning from a self-study guide and passing
                  an examination. Continuing education is required to            Integration between hospitals and public health
                  maintain certification.                                        units—Outbreaks obviously do not confine themselves
                                                                                 to hospitals. Therefore, formal linkages between hospital
                  Health Canada was formerly involved in infection control       infection control programs and public health units are
                  training; a senior Health Canada nurse led modular training    important. In Ontario, for example, mandatory guidelines
                  courses for practitioners across the country. These courses    require that an employee of the local public health unit
                  were well received, but Health Canada has neither offered      sit on each hospital infection control committee. Informal
                  nor been directly involved in infection control training       contacts are common, but as we shall see in Chapter 8,
                  courses since 1989. There is now one formal training           compliance with guidelines is variable.
                  program in Canada—the Canadian Hospital Infection
                  Control Association and Centennial College partner to          7B.5 Infectious Disease Specialists
                  train infection control practitioners in an intensive
                  two-week course.                                               Infectious disease specialists are physicians certified in
                                                                                 internal medicine or paediatrics who have taken additional
                  Hospital epidemiologists—Some physicians, usually              sub-specialty training in infectious disease. Most infectious
                  trained in infectious disease, spend part or all of their      disease physicians choose to work at academic rather
                  time as medical directors of infection control programs.       than community hospitals. Committee interviewees
                  These individuals are known as “hospital epidemiologists”      speculated the preference for teaching hospitals might be
                  in the USA, although few have full training in epidemi-        related to compensation. It is not uncommon for these
                  ology. Only one Canadian university, the University of         specialists in teaching hospitals to be supported by a
                  Calgary, currently offers post-graduate training in hospital   variety of salary sources to maintain a competitive income,
                  epidemiology. The number of fully-trained hospital             given the relatively limited potential for generating fee-for-
                  epidemiologists in Canada is extremely limited, and most       service revenue through patient care. In community
                  of them received their education in the United States. Many    hospitals, infectious disease physicians are not able to bill
                  physicians working as infection control directors lack this    as much as other specialists. More generally, infectious
                  background. The advantage of hospital epidemiology             disease specialists face the same income gap as other
                  training is that it helps to create a conjoint public health   cognition-based medical specialties when contrasted with
                  and infection control approach.                                procedurally-oriented specialties.

                  Fewer than 60% of Canadian hospitals have a physician          The continued challenges of older and emerging
                  serving as infection control director. Those who fill these    infectious diseases, including the appearance of more
                  roles sometimes lack formal training, and others with          antibiotic-resistant organisms, has led more community
S A R S




                  infection control or hospital epidemiology backgrounds         hospitals to search out infectious disease specialists.
                  are spread across multiple institutions. The reason for this   In the Greater Toronto Area, for example, there are now
                  undersupply is clear—infection control activity does not       12 community-based specialists in infectious diseases as
                  count as ‘billable time’ for physicians, and hospitals are     contrasted with two a decade ago. However, this remains
f r o m




                  understandably reluctant to divert scarce resources into       a specialty that is undersubscribed and inconsistently
                  unfunded programs.                                             supported by conventional fee-for-service billings.
L e a r n i n g




                  132       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


7B.6 Epidemiologists                                           control practitioners are in critically short supply given
                                                               the new standards about to be released. Infectious disease
Committee informants were virtually unanimous in their         epidemiologists are few and far between, and Canada also
belief that Canada needs more epidemiologists who can          lacks medical microbiologists and fully-qualified directors
do outbreak investigation and infectious disease research.     of hospital infection control. Existing human resources,
While Canada does train a modest number of epidemiol-          in sum, are insufficient to meet current and future public
ogists, they are drawn largely into non-communicable           health challenges.
disease epidemiology, including cancer and cardiovascular
disease, as well as health services research where their
observational and analytical skills are both valuable and      7C. Nature of Education and
valued. A prominent exception is HIV/AIDS; many                    Training
highly-trained epidemiologists are working on controlling
this disease. Canada must draw more students into the          Although Canada needs more public health workers,
field of infectious disease epidemiology and provide           increasing the supply alone would be a half-measure.
support and training opportunities for them. It has also       A thorough review of public health training programs is
been argued that short courses in infectious disease           also needed—new entrants to the public health workforce
epidemiology are an essential part of capacity building        should be appropriately qualified, and existing public
for many aspects of public health practice and leadership,     health workers should be provided with opportunities to
but are not widely available.                                  acquire additional skills if necessary. We focus here on
                                                               just three of the groups reviewed above—physicians,
7B.7 Other Public Health Workers                               nurses, and epidemiologists.

Many other disciplines do work that is relevant to public      7C.1      Physicians
health. Examples include public health inspectors, dental
hygienists, nutritionists, health promotion specialists,       Although we produce far too few public health physicians,
communication officers, sociologists, and community            the ones who do undergo specialty training are well
development workers to name a few. Little or no infor-         qualified. Unlike in the United States and the United
mation is available on the number, trends, and challenges      Kingdom, all residency programs in Canada must be
facing these groups, emphasizing the need for a compre-        university-based. The Royal College of Physicians and
hensive inventory of the public health workforce. In           Surgeons of Canada closely monitors all specialty residency
disciplines such as pharmacy and veterinary medicine,          programs, ensuring uniformly high standards across the
there is more reliable information on the workforce but,       country. According to the National Specialty Society for




                                                                                                                                C a n a d a
as indicated in submissions by national associations for       Community Medicine [NSSCM], all nine fully-accredited
both these professions, insufficient attention has been        training programs for public health specialization offer
paid to how their work could be integrated with public         relevant didactic training plus supervised field-based experi-
health priorities.                                             ence in responding to communicable disease outbreaks.

7B.8 Overall Assessment                                        On the other hand, the nature of this outbreak experience




                                                                                                                                i n
                                                               clearly varies. At least part of the problem in combating
Although data are scarce, the SARS outbreak made clear         SARS was that the generation of public health physicians


                                                                                                                                H e a l t h
that even in Toronto, where the public health infrastruc-      who had faced massive outbreaks of life-threatening
ture is relatively strong, public health human resources       respiratory or enteric viruses is no longer practising. An
are deficient. Indeed, one of the rate-limiting steps in       outbreak of an enterovirus like Norwalk has a significant
the Committee’s plan to enhance Canada’s public health         effect on the health care system but does not threaten
infrastructure is the lack of qualified personnel to take on   lives the way that SARS did. HIV has its own relatively
the relevant roles and responsibilities. Several provincial
                                                                                                                                P u b l i c


                                                               distinct epidemiology. West Nile virus is not transmitted
and territorial ministries have vacancies in key positions.    from person to person, and tuberculosis is rare. The
Although urban centres are currently able to fill most of      generation of public health physicians who fought
their public health positions, problems with recruiting        outbreaks of polio has long since retired. The public
and retaining public health physicians were reported in        health physicians and hospital epidemiologists who fought
all jurisdictions and public health nurses are in              SARS have a unique experience that is shared only by
                                                                                                                                o f




particularly short supply in rural and northern areas.         some who have fought outbreaks through international
Anecdotal reports suggest that the situation with public       outreach and training. Their experiences should be
                                                                                                                                R e n e w a l




health inspectors is only marginally better, and infection     distilled and shared widely.



..........................................................................................                              133
                  .................................................................................................

                  Exposure of public health physicians to hospital infection     strengthened linkages between the academe and the
                  control issues varies with the site of their training and      public health sector “advance an evidence-based culture
                  early practice experiences. The NSSCM highlighted that         of learning, stimulate interdisciplinary research and
                  regional health authorities have offered an opportunity        knowledge translation, [and] accelerate basic and
                  for more seamless integration of the public health and         advanced training.”
                  clinical perspectives. Many regions have a Communicable
                  Disease Advisory Committee that includes representatives       7C.2 Nursing
                  with expertise in broad public health, hospital and
                  long-term care infection control, epidemiology, and            Traditionally, registered nurses had to complete an
                  surveillance.                                                  additional one-year diploma before becoming a public
                                                                                 health nurse. Nursing degrees are now becoming the
                  Relatively few public health physicians maintain active        norm, and diplomas have been discontinued. Most
                  clinical practices while working for a public health unit.     public health nurses today are baccalaureate-trained, and
                  Aside from reporting mandatory diseases, even fewer clinical   further specific training in public health is no longer
                  specialists and family doctors interact in a meaningful        mandatory. Instead, public health nurses learn on the
                  way with their local public health units. Opinions             job through formal and informal in-service training.
                  presented to the Committee varied as to the merits and
                  nature of “cross-training”. Some endorsed the idea of          Some experts believe that specific public health nursing
                  dual training in general internal medicine and community       training should be reintroduced. Public health nurses
                  medicine. Others pointed out that specialists in commu-        have expressed the view that public health nursing
                  nity medicine have ample clinical exposure during their        should be regarded as an advanced practice specialty.
                  post-graduate training, including full certification in        Acceptance of this position has apparently been hampered
                  family medicine. The NSSCM suggested that cross-training       by the unavailability of graduate programs in public health
                  would be best constructed by focusing not on public            nursing. When nurses with longstanding experience in
                  health specialists but on clinicians, viz. requiring family    the clinical sector move to public health posts, formal
                  medicine, emergency medicine, general pediatrics and           retraining is appropriate, but the formal training and
                  internal medicine, and infectious disease residents “to        retraining opportunities in public health are limited.
                  complete at least a one-month rotation in communicable         Relatively few registered nurses go on to a master’s
                  disease control in a local public health unit.”                degree in public health or similar graduate credential,
                                                                                 and career paths in public health nursing have not
                  The Survey of Public Health Capacity in Canada found a         been well-defined.
                  widespread belief that continuing education opportunities
                  are lacking for public health practitioners. About half of     Some respondents also suggested that the educational
                  respondents reported that continuing education to be           system could better equip nursing graduates for public
                  somewhat or completely inadequate. Greater continuing          health practice. The undergraduate nursing curriculum
                  education opportunities are especially needed in the           tends to focus on acute care; population and public health
                  areas of informatics and technology.                           courses are limited. In addition to ensuring adequate
                                                                                 credit hours for public health theory and practice, training
                  Limited linkages to academe add to the problems with           institutions need to hire faculty members with public
                  recruitment and retention of public health practitioners       health expertise.
                  in urban areas. Among the various medical specialties,
                  community medicine provides perhaps the fewest                 Many faculties/schools of nursing would benefit from
                  opportunities for active practitioners to form a working       closer collaboration with public health units to provide
                  relationship with a university. Some community health          meaningful practicum experiences for nursing students.
S A R S




                  practitioners hold unpaid adjunct appointments, but            Some Committee informants remarked that curricula
                  there are only a few instances where public health             should be more collaborative—public health nurses work
                  physicians engage in both academic work and public             in interdisciplinary teams, and they should train in an
                  health practice. Community medicine specialists who            interdisciplinary environment as well.
f r o m




                  work entirely within the university sector are also
                  becoming rare. As Prof. Harvey Skinner, chair of public
                  health sciences at the University of Toronto has written,
L e a r n i n g




                  134       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

As already suggested, opportunities for upgrading know-       7C.3 Epidemiologists
ledge in public health nursing are limited. Some employers
fund continuing education; few fund it satisfactorily and     It was abundantly clear during the SARS outbreak that
some do not fund it at all. Some Committee informants         Canada needs more epidemiologists with an orientation
reported workplace policies supportive of continuing          to field investigation and outbreak response. Canada has
education; others described an environment with rigid         many university epidemiology programs, but most of these
schedules (compromising the ability to attend courses), a     are research-oriented. One exception is the University of
complete lack of tuition fee support, and an unwillingness    Toronto’s Master of Health Science program—its content
or inability among supervisors to provide the on-site         is relevant to public health, and many of its enrolees are
practical experience necessary for certain qualifications.    practising health professionals looking to upgrade their
Unique challenges were identified in northern, rural and      skills. However, the program constitutes a broad prepar-
remote settings where in-person continuing education is       ation for a career in public health and does not offer the
prohibitively expensive. Keeping rural public health          depth or experience required for outbreak investigation.
nurses energized by contemporary best practices is nearly     Furthermore, PhD-stream epidemiologists seem to be
impossible with the current communications infrastructure.    drawn largely to non-communicable diseases, HIV/AIDS,
                                                              and health services research.
National standards for public health nursing practice
would be helpful in establishing a set of core competencies   One non-university option is the Field Epidemiology
in the public health nursing workforce. They must be          Training Program operated by Health Canada. This
implemented carefully to avoid compromising an already        program takes in just five or six individuals per year
limited workforce by erecting new barriers to entry. The      (mainly health professionals who already have a master’s
necessary core competencies suggested by Committee            degree in epidemiology), provides further training and
interviewees include an understanding of:                     then assigns them to supervisors in the field. Under
                                                              supervision, the trainees usually have the opportunity to
• population health principles                                investigate outbreaks. The result has been a small but
                                                              growing cadre of field epidemiologists who are better
• epidemiology and surveillance                               prepared for leadership positions in local, provincial or
• basic statistics                                            national public health agencies.

• environmental health                                        The program has tremendous potential. US experience
• informatics and data management                             with a similar program illustrates the many advantages of
                                                              a dynamic field-epidemiology training program in creating




                                                                                                                           C a n a d a
• program planning, management and evaluation                 cross-linkages among jurisdictions and strong expertise in
• adult education                                             outbreak investigation and response, including issues of
                                                              institutional infection control. We believe the field
• advocacy                                                    epidemiology program should be reviewed and greatly
• negotiation                                                 augmented as part of a broad F/P/T strategy for renewal
                                                              of human resources in public health. The proposed F/P/T




                                                                                                                           i n
• interdisciplinary practice                                  Network for Communicable Disease Control, and a
• injury prevention                                           National Public Health Service within the Canadian Agency


                                                                                                                           H e a l t h
                                                              for Public Health would provide training opportunities
• health promotion                                            and a career path for those enrolled in this program.
• community development
                                                              Health Canada’s Skills Enhancement for Health Surveillance
• social marketing                                            program is a web-based distance education program aimed
                                                                                                                           P u b l i c



• public policy and legislation                               at front-line and supervisory workers in local health
                                                              departments. While not intended to substitute for master’s
• research methodology and statistics                         level training, and still under development, it aims to
                                                              provide basic, high-quality training in epidemiology,
                                                              surveillance and information management.
                                                                                                                           o f
                                                                                                                           R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                         135
                  .................................................................................................

                                                                                  equivalent. This valuable concept should be embraced in
                  7D. A Public Health Human                                       every city where the 16 Canadian health science faculties
                      Resources Strategy                                          are located. “Teaching health units” are critical if public
                                                                                  health is to attract its share of exceptionally able
                  No attempt to improve public health will succeed that           physicians, nurses, epidemiologists, social scientists, and
                  does not recognize the fundamental importance of                other public health workers. Analogously, in fields such
                  providing and maintaining in every local health agency          as medical microbiology, both Health Canada’s labora-
                  across Canada an adequate staff of highly skilled and           tories and the British Columbia Centre for Disease
                  motivated public health professionals. Our national aim         Control have demonstrated that close links with university
                  should be to produce a cadre of outstanding public              departments are beneficial. These academic connections
                  health professionals who are adequately qualified and           feed a cycle of training and research opportunities that
                  compensated, and who have clear roles, responsibilities         help to make knowledge-based workforces self-renewing
                  and career paths. Without urgent implementation of a            and dynamic.
                  public health human resources strategy, that aim cannot
                  be achieved.                                                    The available data suggest that shortages and challenges
                                                                                  from insufficient training and suboptimal work environ-
                  Other nations are also grappling with this challenge. In        ments affect many constituents of the public health
                  the USA, partly as a result of a fragmentation of public        workforce. A national initiative to frame a public health
                  health services at the local level, skills and qualifications   strategy is clearly needed. Part of the exercise must be to
                  are suboptimal. A CDC report published in 2000 reported         hear out the concerns of public health practitioners in all
                  that only 44% of the public health workforce had formal         the relevant disciplines. Any national strategy for renewal
                  training in public health and just 22% of local health          of human resources in public health can only succeed if
                  department executives had graduate degrees in public            developed in consultation with a broad range of stakeholders
                  health. Despite (or perhaps because of) these discouraging      and supported by a dedicated national secretariat.
                  statistics, the USA and several other countries we reviewed     Moreover, a plan on its own will do nothing—it must
                  have specific initiatives directed towards developing and       attract resources and be put into action as a matter of
                  sustaining the public health workforce. For example,            urgency. This is why, in budgeting for the Canadian
                  joint initiatives between the CDC and post-graduate             Agency for Public Health, the Committee projected a
                  schools of public health target the continuing education        recurring expenditure of $25 million per annum for
                  needs of the United States public health workforce.             health human resource renewal.

                  We have highlighted already that Canada faces a serious         Training, professional development and continuing
                  shortage of public health physicians. However, simply           education will be prominent activities in reconfiguring
                  creating more training positions will not suffice.              the public health workforce. Existing programs can be
                  Incentives are needed that will draw medical students           bolstered. The Field Epidemiology Training Program, for
                  into community medicine as a specialty training program.        example, should be significantly expanded beyond its
                  In turn, given the clear problem with graduates who             current intake of five or six trainees each year.
                  leave the field, there is a need to provide community
                  medicine graduates with more rewarding careers in               As outlined in earlier chapters, the Committee envisages
                  public health per se. Some small rural regions with few         a system of federally-funded training placements that
                  resources will continue to find it difficult to attract         would constitute a logical career path for young Canadians
                  qualified medical officers of health; it may be necessary       interested in public health. A public health nurse fresh
                  to combine health regions for public health purposes, or        from his baccalaureate could take a part-time Master's
                  to have a two-tier system of medical officers of health,        degree in Public Health with a tuition bursary while
S A R S




                  with senior staff acting as consultants or supervisors to       doing disease surveillance projects in one of the regional
                  several regions.                                                nodes on the F/P/T Network for Communicable Disease
                                                                                  Control. He could then spend a year doing front-line
                  Medical officers of health and senior public health nurses      general public health work in an Aboriginal community
f r o m




                  also need better linkages with universities. Most physicians    and return to a health promotion position in Vancouver’s
                  practising at teaching hospitals receive university             public health department. A physician trained in
                  appointments—in addition to treating patients, they             community medicine could do a Field Epidemiology
                  teach medical students and resident physicians, and are         Placement, learning the essentials of outbreak
L e a r n i n g




                  often supported to do research. In the public health            management as part of a mobile response team based in
                  sphere, the teaching health unit is the teaching hospital       Winnipeg. She could go on to become an Associate



                  136       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

Medical Officer in Toronto, then rejoin the federal             inter-jurisdictional nature of public health practices,
system as the director of a non-communicable disease            necessitate a national approach. The western provinces,
surveillance program in the Canadian Agency for Public          for example, cannot currently meet their needs for public
Health. Internet-based distance education could be used         health physicians without recruiting from Ontario.
more extensively. All of these activities would be
undertaken with academic, voluntary sector, professional        We could also recruit our public health workforce
and international partners, linked to and by a series of        from abroad. While this may be suitable in select
formal and informal networks, and set out in a multi-year       instances, relying on foreign recruitment is subject to
plan with milestones and measurement of progress.               fluctuations in international supply, arguably unethical
                                                                when we raid developing countries such as South Africa
Public health workers, like other Canadians in the workforce,   that have health human resource challenges of their own,
want and need stimulating career paths. A National              and unlikely to meet Canadian needs in the longer-term.
Public Health Service, where interested individuals could
move through medium-term assignments in different               All this leads us back to the view that a coherent national
disciplines or locations, would build capacity by strength-     strategy is the only way forward. A national public
ening individual skills and by sharing knowledge across         health human resources strategy should be based on a
jurisdictions. This movement of personnel would assist          partnership (after the Australian model) involving federal,
with disease surveillance and coordination of health            provincial and territorial governments, as well as academic
promotion. A wider range of pan-Canadian experiences            stakeholders and professional associations. Under the
for public health leaders would also facilitate sharing of      guidance of a director and with the support of a secretariat,
experiences with new programs and systems. Canada’s             such a partnership must develop a strategy, implement it,
F/P/T health systems are pluralistic and innovative; better     and monitor its progress. The secretariat should work
learning across the systems would save costs, boost morale,     with regulatory bodies, CIHI and other organizations to
and build collaboration. Last, in emergencies, a cadre of       support data collection, develop better baseline informa-
individuals familiar with change and accustomed to steep        tion about the workforce, compare roles of public health
learning curves would be ready for deployment to                workers in Canada and other countries, and evaluate the
municipal and provincial public health agencies.                roles of different members of the public health workforce.
                                                                The secretariat must also explore why certain profes-
The Committee did review several options for improving          sionals choose public health practice and others do not;
our public health human resources. The status quo is            help define the educational standards needed to achieve,
clearly insufficient—the public health human resources          maintain and enhance competence for public health; and
situation would continue to deteriorate, leaving                make recommendations regarding public health pay scales.




                                                                                                                                C a n a d a
Canadians vulnerable to a wide range of infectious
diseases in the future, and subject to preventable              Institutional infection control provides an illustration of
morbidity and mortality from chronic diseases and               how the strategy and secretariat might function. Relevant
injuries. A strategy to increase the number of public           stakeholders would be pulled together into a task force to
health workers by lowering standards was briefly                address this specific sector. A first phase of activity might




                                                                                                                                i n
considered. When properly qualified persons are                 see assessment of current standards and training programs,
unavailable, one could, in theory rely upon untrained           along with a more precise delineation of the supply of
persons. The Committee believes this would lead to a            infection control practitioners and anticipated shortfalls.


                                                                                                                                H e a l t h
“race to the bottom”, would negate gains made over several      The next phase could be the rapid development of strate-
decades of gradual improvement in standards, and                gies to increase training opportunities and offer incentives
increase the risk to the public’s health. Notwithstanding       to nurses, laboratory technologists, and others who might
these concerns, there may be valid reasons to examine           be trained in infection control. These strategies would be
critically some of the competencies and qualifications          rolled out with support from the Canadian Agency for
                                                                                                                                P u b l i c



required for effective public health practice. The public       Public Health and provincial/territorial jurisdictions as
has a right to know that their tax dollars are flowing to       well as institutional partners. Creation of continuing
support the most cost-effective approach to provision           education and recertification programs could also be part
of services.                                                    of the strategy for sustaining the ICP workforce. Last, to
                                                                maintain a cycle of workforce renewal, graduate programs
                                                                                                                                o f




In an incremental/disjointed strategy, each F/P/T juris-        in infection control could be developed in a limited
diction might attempt to address issues as they arise.          number of universities, thereby training the next
                                                                                                                                R e n e w a l




Education and recruitment issues, however, as well as the       generation of teachers of infection control practitioners.




..........................................................................................                              137
                  .................................................................................................

                  Any national human resource strategy should be closely           science. Finally, Canadian universities, the Canadian
                  aligned with other plans to enhance surge capacity. The          Institutes of Health Research, the new Canadian Agency
                  HERT concept, for example, appears best suited to full-          for Public Health, and other federal agencies and
                  blown emergencies. Might there also be a system of               departments, must play an active role in increasing the
                  human resource clusters so that redeployment of personnel        opportunities for public health workers to develop or
                  would be possible in the event of other shortfalls in local      strengthen their research skills.
                  or regional response to a particular set of health threats?
                  From the Committee’s perspective, any human resource
                  strategy should not only aim at making Canada self-
                                                                                   7E. Recommendations
                  sufficient as regards public health personnel; it should         The Committee recommends that:
                  also explicitly aim at enhancing inter-jurisdictional
                  collaboration on a continuing basis. A national strategy         7.1 Health Canada should engage provincial/
                  could therefore provide for more varied positions, flexible          territorial departments/ministries of health in
                  employment, exchanges between different job positions                immediate discussions around the initiation of
                  (both within Canada and internationally), and cross-                 a national strategy for the renewal of human
                  jurisdictional continuing education.                                 resources in public health. This F/P/T strategy
                                                                                       should be developed in concert with a wide range
                  Either through the partnership or through the creation of            of non-governmental partners, and include funding
                  a virtual national public health institute focused on educa-         mechanisms to support public health human
                  tion and training in public health, dedicated funding                resource development on a continuing basis.
                  mechanisms must be developed to support public health
                  workforce development. The $25 million per annum from            7.2 Health Canada should catalyze this strategy by
                  the Canadian Agency for Public Health would go some                  urgently exploring opportunities to create and
                  distance to catalyzing workforce renewal. But shared                 support training positions and programs in
                  funding will be necessary to create regional consortia and           various public health-related fields where there
                  teaching health units, to augment graduate and post-                 are shortfalls in workforces (e.g., community
                  graduate training positions in public health, to increase the        medicine physicians, field epidemiologists,
                  presence of actively practicing public health professionals          infection control practitioners, public health
                  in universities, to support opportunities for advanced               nursing, and others).
                  training in public health for nurses already in the workforce,   7.3 The Canadian Agency for Public Health should
                  and to provide scholarships and bursaries targeted at high-          develop a National Public Health Service, with
                  need areas such as First Nations and rural communities.              a variety of career paths and opportunities for
                                                                                       Canadians interested in public health. The
                  The strategy will depend, as noted, on more than F/P/T               National Public Health Service should include
                  collaboration. Partnerships must be developed with                   an extensive program of secondments to and
                  educational institutions, relevant national and provincial           from provincial/territorial and local health
                  associations, regulatory bodies, major municipal health              agencies, with arrangements for mutual recog-
                  units, industry, research agencies, rural communities,               nition of seniority and a range of collaborative
                  Aboriginal groups, and other stakeholders. Educational               opportunities for advancement.
                  institutions, in particular, would need incentives to
                  review curricula in relevant health disciplines to ensure        7.4 Educational institutions, in collaboration with
                  adequate exposure to public health and the control of                teaching hospitals as applicable, should develop
                  infectious diseases. A major step forward would be                   contingency plans to limit the adverse impact
                  development of an 18-24 month non-thesis applied                     on their students and trainees from infectious
S A R S




                  epidemiology and public health master’s degree for                   disease outbreaks, while maximizing learning
                  health professionals, available in full-time and ‘executive/         opportunities from these events. These plans
                  part-time’ formats, at multiple sites across Canada. Other           should include communications, education
                  foci for new programming include “summer schools” or                 regarding infection control, preparedness with
                  short courses in epidemiology, outbreak investigation,               appropriate protective gear, guidelines for
f r o m




                  public health informatics, health promotion, and similar             support of students/trainees in quarantine or
                  topics relevant to the practice of public health, targeting          work-and-home isolation, strategies to limit the
                  public health practitioners already in the workforce.                impact of impeded access to usual teaching and
                                                                                       research sites, and guidelines for the involve-
L e a r n i n g




                  We also urge the creation of a one-year public health
                  leadership and management program, and funding of                    ment of students in the care of patients with
                  post-doctoral positions in public health laboratory                  serious infectious conditions.



                  138       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


Sources and References                                       Dr. Rick Matthias
                                                                Department of Health Care and Epidemiology,
Santana, S., “Containing SARS: University of Toronto            University of British Columbia
rises to the challenge,” AAMC Reporter, July 2003.           Dr. Bart Harvey
(www.aamc.org/newsroom/reporter/july03/sars.htm)                Director of Community Medicine Residency Program,
                                                                Department of Public Health Sciences,
McGugan, Susan. “Medical school on bypass during the            University of Toronto
SARS outbreak,” Clinical and Investigative Medicine, June
2003, 26(3):106-7.                                           Dr. Dick Zoutman
                                                                Medical Director, Infection Control, Kingston General
Advisory Committee on Population Health and Health              Hospital, and Vice-President, Canadian Hospital
Security, Final Report of the Public Health Human               Infection Control Association
Resources Task Group. June 2003.                             Dr. Sam Ratnam
                                                                Director, Public Health Laboratory,
Report to the F/P/T Deputy Ministers of Health by the           St. John’s, Newfoundland.
Advisory Committee on Population Health, “Survey of
Public Health Capacity in Canada, Highlights,” March 2001.   Dr. Tony Mazzuli
                                                                President, Canadian Association of Clinical
Health Canada, Centre for Surveillance Coordination,            Microbiology and Infectious Disease.
“End-to-End Surveillance Project, Consolidated Gap           Dr. Susan Richardson
Analysis,” September 2002.                                      President, Canadian Association of Medical
                                                                Microbiologists
National Public Health Partnership, Australia,
http://hna.ffh.vic.gov.au/nphp/index.htm

US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Public
Health Practice Program Office, http://www.phppo.cdc.gov/

US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Epidemi-
ology Program Office, http://www.cdc.gov/epo/index.htm

Interviews:




                                                                                                                        C a n a d a
Dr. Cory Neudorf
   Medical Officer of Health, Chief Information Officer
   and Vice-President, Information, Saskatoon Health
   District




                                                                                                                        i n
Dr. Stephen Whitehead
   Associate Medical Officer of Health, Saskatoon Health


                                                                                                                        H e a l t h
   District; formerly Director of Public Health,
   Derbyshire, United Kingdom
Ron de Burger
  Director of Environmental Health, Toronto City
  Health Department
                                                                                                                        P u b l i c



Shirley Paton
   Chief, Nosocomial Infections, Centre for Infectious
   Disease Prevention and Control, Health Canada
Dr. Richard Musto
                                                                                                                        o f




   Head, Department of Community Health,
   University of Calgary
                                                                                                                        R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                       139
                                 SARS and Public Health
Chapter 8


CLINICAL AND PUBLIC HEALTH SYSTEMS
ISSUES ARISING FROM THE OUTBREAK
OF SARS IN TORONTO
.................................................................................................



Throughout its deliberations, the Committee appreciated            individuals contacted made every effort to provide input
the importance of understanding the response to SARS               within the schedule and the Committee greatly appreciates
within a clinical and local public health context. While           their efforts.
we recognize that these matters are primarily a provincial
responsibility, viruses do not respect borders or jurisdictions,   We have dealt elsewhere with the readiness of Health
and lessons from Ontario are almost certainly applicable           Canada to respond in support of those at the local and
to other provinces. We have indicated that British                 provincial levels fighting SARS. Health Canada’s responses
Columbia was both fortunate and in some respects better            were seriously confounded and limited by the lack of
prepared to deal with SARS. We also speculated that had            jurisdictional clarity about roles and responsibilities and
SARS touched down somewhere other than Toronto, the                the lack of what can be termed ‘a receptor function’ in
results could have been more devastating, although it is           the provincial system. However, it should be emphasized
possible that some of the jurisdictional tensions would            here that, during the consultants’ work, multiple infor-
have been less.                                                    mants indicated disappointment with the role played by
                                                                   Health Canada in dealing with the outbreak in Toronto.
Based on the SARS experience, this chapter discusses the
steps that key informants believe might be taken to                The chapter also draws strongly on a series of roundtables
enhance the readiness, efficiency and effectiveness of the         convened by Health Canada’s Office of Nursing Policy to




                                                                                                                                 C a n a d a
response to a future outbreak. It also provides an                 solicit the perspectives of front-line nurses and support
assessment of the deferred service and disruption during           staff affected by the SARS outbreak in Toronto. Regulatory
SARS and actions that might be taken in future to reduce           colleges, professional bodies, and unions affiliated with
the degree of disruption to ‘normal’ services.                     these two groups were also invited. Two Committee
                                                                   members attended the sessions.




                                                                                                                                 i n
This chapter draws heavily on work by the Hay Group.
The Committee gave a specific mandate to these                     In framing our perspectives and recommendations, the
consultants and interacted with them on study design.              Committee was also guided by input from several organi-


                                                                                                                                 H e a l t h
Their conclusions were extraordinarily consistent with             zations. Among these were briefs from the Victorian Order
those that arose from stakeholder submissions and from             of Nurses, Ontario Association of Medical Laboratories,
the Committee’s own experiences, interviews, reading,              the Ontario Hospital Association, the Ontario Council of
and deliberations.                                                 Teaching Hospitals, and the Association of Nursing
                                                                   Directors and Supervisors of Ontario Health Agencies.
                                                                                                                                 P u b l i c



The consultants used a combination of surveys, interviews,
focus groups and data analysis. These activities focused           In general, a striking congruence of perspectives emerged
on a sample of organizations and individuals in the                in the responses of administrators, specialist physicians,
public domain significantly affected by SARS and/or who            front-line nursing and support staff, and unions repre-
were actively involved in the management of the response.          senting the latter groups. The chapter focuses on areas
                                                                                                                                 o f




Given the time frame available, the consultants established        for improvement; the consultants specifically solicited
firm schedules for participation and requested that partici-       input on the strengths and weaknesses associated with the
                                                                                                                                 R e n e w a l




pants make themselves available. The organizations and             response to the outbreak and steps that might be taken
                                                                   to improve that response in the future. Most informants


..........................................................................................                               141
                  .................................................................................................

                  indicated that most participants indicated that the aspect                      Daily Census Summary [DCS] data were provided by the
                  of the response that allowed the system, in the end, to                         OMHLTC. These are records of the number of inpatients
                  successfully contain the outbreak of SARS was the                               treated, patient days and type of service delivered in
                  incredible effort made by front-line staff. This report                         Ontario hospitals each day. These data support
                  focuses on opportunities for the future and thus is unable                      comparisons of changes in acute care hospital occupancy
                  to give a full accounting of the valiant and sometimes                          rates during the SARS outbreak.
                  heroic efforts of many of the public health and health
                  care workers in the Greater Toronto Area [GTA] as they                          Detailed, patient-specific records of inpatient and ambula-
                  battled to aid those infected and contain the spread of                         tory procedure activity for the GTA and Toronto hospital
                  the disease.                                                                    patients receiving care during the SARS outbreak will not
                                                                                                  be available until late 2003. This means that there can
                  Last, we have deliberately kept our recommendations at a                        be no direct analysis of the impact of SARS on hospital
                  fairly high level of generality. This reflects considerations                   case mix and specific clinical groups. However, to provide
                  of mandate, time constraints, and the existence of two                          some information about the normal case mix and clinical
                  other processes to learn lessons from SARS in Ontario.                          characteristics of the patients treated in Toronto hospitals,
                  We anticipate that more detailed recommendations                                the Hay Group used the 2001/02 Canadian Institute for
                  applicable to the Ontario experience will be forthcoming                        Health Information [CIHI] records for Toronto hospitals
                  from a provincial panel chaired by David Walker, Dean of                        obtained previously for a benchmarking study. These
                  the Faculty of Medicine at Queen’s University and from                          data were then used to estimate the expected distribution
                  Mr. Justice Archie Campbell’s public health investigation.                      by program of Toronto hospital activity during the
                                                                                                  period of the SARS outbreak and to support the estimate
                                                                                                  of the volume and cost of deferred surgical activity.
                  8A. Scope and Approach
                  In total, the consultants conducted 25 focus groups and                         The Committee had hoped to examine physician service
                  21 interviews with organizations and individuals                                volumes but approvals from the OMHLTC to access the
                  representative of those that were most directly involved                        necessary data set had not been obtained at the time of
                  in treating people infected with SARS and containing                            preparation of this report. Researchers at the Institute for
                  the spread of the disease. This included staff of nine                          Clinical Evaluative Sciences will be undertaking analyses
                  hospitals, four public health units, Community Care                             of physician practices as part of a broader assessment of
                  Access Centres [CCACs] in Toronto, representative primary                       process and outcome impacts from the outbreak.
                  care providers, and officials of the Ontario Ministry of
                  Health and Long-Term Care [OMHLTC].                                             As to the four roundtables convened by the Office of
                                                                                                  Nursing Policy, attendance follows:
                  They surveyed all acute care, rehabilitation and complex
                  continuing care hospitals in the GTA regarding their                            • sixteen front-line nurses from eight organizations;
                  readiness and experience with SARS. They received                               • nine participants from organizations representing
                  responses from all Toronto and GTA hospitals included in                          nurses;
                  the survey1.
                                                                                                  • six front-line support staff from three organizations;
                  The survey collected activity volume data for March,                              and
                  April, May, and June of 2002 and 2003. The four months                          • four participants from organizations representing
                  in 2003 were selected to cover the period of the SARS                             front-line staff.
                  outbreak. The data for the same four months in 2002
S A R S




                  were collected to provide an approximate activity baseline,                     Participants included full-time, part-time, and casual
                  with the simplifying assumption that any major changes                          staff from various sectors. Categories of staff included:
                  in activity levels could be attributed to the impact of SARS.                   registered nurse, registered practical nurse, infection
                                                                                                  control practitioner, nurse manager, environmental services,
f r o m




                  Much of the analysis of the hospital survey activity data                       dietetic attendant, porter, and patient service aide.
                  focused on comparing the 2003 activity levels with the
                  volumes for the corresponding month in 2002. Only
                  hospitals with complete data for all eight months were
L e a r n i n g




                  included in the analyses.

                  1 Some multi-site hospitals provided separate responses for each of their sites, while others provided a single response for the corporation.



                  142         .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


8B. Readiness of the Health                                                 include the SARS Alliance announced May 27 and the
                                                                            SARS Operations Centre [SOC] established by the
    System                                                                  OMHLTC.

8B.1 Background                                                             8B.2 Roles and Responsibilities
Key dates in the outbreak have already been presented                       During the initial stages of the outbreak, between
in Chapter 2. To recapitulate, the index patients with                      approximately March 10 and March 26, 2003, various
atypical pneumonia were seen at the Grace Site of the                       respondents were unclear on the roles and jurisdictional
Scarborough Hospital the week of March 10, 2003 and                         responsibilities of Health Canada, the provincial Ministry
identified as potential SARS cases on March 14. Premier                     of Health and the regional Public Health Units. From
Ernie Eves declared SARS a provincial emergency on                          their perspective, it was unclear, for example:
March 26. On or about March 28, under direction from
the Provincial Operations Centre [POC], all GTA and                         • who was to be the contact with the World Health
Simcoe County hospitals restricted access to critically ill                   Organization [WHO];
patients and necessary staff only. On March 29, these
hospitals were also directed to “initiate full Code Orange                  • who was responsible for keeping the system informed;
emergency response plans.” The Premier lifted the                           • who had the jurisdiction/role to issue press releases;
provincial emergency as of May 17, 2003.
                                                                            • who was to provide advice on proper infection control
A ‘second wave’ of SARS cases was confirmed on                                procedures and to whom; and
May 23, 2003. On May 27, the provincial government                          • whose definitional frameworks were to be used.
announced, “four hospitals, working with all Greater
Toronto Area hospitals, will use their expertise and                        Respondents observed that these issues appeared to be a
leadership in a coordinated fight against Severe Acute                      source of debate between the OMHLTC and Health Canada.
Respiratory Syndrome (SARS).” The four hospitals were                       The province assumed responsibility for communication
North York General Hospital, St. Michael’s Hospital,                        with the public initially through the Public Health
The Scarborough Hospital, General Division, and the                         Commissioner and later through a subset of members of
Etobicoke site of the William Osler Health Centre. The                      the Executive Committee of the POC. It became clear
Minister stated that “We are concentrating the treatment                    that Health Canada had responsibility for contact with
and expertise of SARS at four key sites around the Greater                  WHO. However, respondents were concerned that it was
Toronto Area to ensure we quickly identify and contain                      not until May 29 that Health Canada announced a full




                                                                                                                                                    C a n a d a
the disease during this current wave of cases… This will                    alignment (or re-alignment) of its criteria for diagnosis of
help us protect the capacity of the health care system as                   SARS with those of WHO.
well as ensure that the health care system in the GTA
keeps running safely and efficiently2.” These four                          Respondents felt that clarity in jurisdiction and role and
hospitals are collectively referred to as the “SARS                         more communication between Health Canada, the
Alliance” hospitals.                                                        OMHLTC, and regional public health units would have




                                                                                                                                                    i n
                                                                            eliminated some of the early confusion in addressing the
For the purposes of this chapter, SARS I refers to the                      outbreak. Front-line roundtable participants spoke of


                                                                                                                                                    H e a l t h
timeframe of approximately March 10 to May 17, 2003.                        “fragmentation” in the system, “silos”, and “chaos”
This timeframe corresponds to the initial identification                    during SARS I.
of SARS in Ontario and the response characterized by the
declaration of a provincial emergency and oversight of
                                                                            Provincial Government
outbreak management by the POC.
                                                                            Command and control for the operational response was
                                                                                                                                                    P u b l i c



SARS II refers to the period beginning on or about                          somewhat clarified when the Premier declared SARS a
May 18, 2003 and ending approximately June 30. This                         provincial emergency on March 26, 2003 under the
timeframe corresponds to the second cluster of SARS                         authority of the Provincial Emergency Plans Act. This
patients and the date of the final new case under                           activated the POC, made up of representatives from all
investigation. Characteristics of the SARS II response                      necessary provincial ministries. Concurrently, each
                                                                                                                                                    o f




                                                                            Ministry activated its own Ministry Advisory Group
                                                                                                                                                    R e n e w a l




2 Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care Press Release, “Eves Government announces four hospitals to lead coordinated fight against SARS,”
  Toronto, May 27, 2003, Canada News Wire.



..........................................................................................                                                   143
                  .................................................................................................

                  [MAG] to advise the POC and manage the emergency on             None of the hospitals contacted for this study has
                  behalf of its respective Ministry. Pre-selected individuals     identified infectious diseases as a priority program; there
                  populated the POC and the MAGs. The consultants                 is also no regional infectious disease program designated
                  interviewed a number of individuals who had contact             by the OMHLTC. Further, there is no formal network of
                  with the POC during SARS I. Most indicated that the             infectious disease specialists and there is no regional
                  multiplicity of participants, and the advice being provided     mechanism to design or implement strategies to respond
                  by the MAGs (most of whom had little understanding or           to an outbreak of infectious disease. It was reported that
                  involvement with SARS), led to a perception of confusion        infection control specialists from hospitals have developed
                  and dysfunction at the centre.                                  an informal network and some hospitals reported learning
                                                                                  about the outbreak through that source. A regional
                  Public Health Units                                             infectious disease network and strategy is clearly needed.
                  There was also confusion regarding the roles and
                                                                                  Many respondents indicated that being prepared requires
                  responsibilities of public health units and their relation-
                                                                                  anticipation of a potential event and the availability of
                  ship to other parts of the system. The reporting relationship
                                                                                  a planned response should it occur. The increasing
                  of Regional Public Health Units through local govern-
                                                                                  prevalence of infectious disease outbreaks and challenges
                  ments was perceived to be a source of uncertainty and
                                                                                  requires that surveillance be an ongoing hospital function,
                  conflict in their relationship with the OMHLTC Public
                                                                                  and that a planned response to an outbreak be available
                  Health Branch. Respondents widely reported that there
                                                                                  on both a routine and emergent basis.
                  was a lack of coordination of information and overlap
                  of roles.
                                                                                  Community Care Access Centres
                  Public health units and hospitals alike reported that there     CCACs are Ontario’s clearinghouse for access to a range
                  was inconsistency in approach and activities across the         of home-based health and social services. They reported
                  public health units in the GTA. Respondents attributed          that the OMHLTC and hospitals did not use the expertise
                  the inconsistencies to the absence of a clear linkage and       of CCACs to the extent that was possible. The CCACs
                  role for the units in the clinical sphere, the weak link of     could have provided greater support in the discharge and
                  the units to the OMHLTC Public Health Branch, and a lack        decanting of patients, particularly in the SARS Alliance
                  of leadership from the OMHLTC Public Health Branch.             facilities that were attempting to create the capacity to
                                                                                  accept SARS patients. In some instances hospitals/
                  A number of respondents criticized the municipal                physicians simply signed patients out without notifying
                  reporting relationship of the regional public health units.     the CCACs for tracking purposes, for arrangement of
                  They acknowledged that a number of the current respon-          appropriate home support, or for appropriate protection
                  sibilities of Public Health benefit from a local emphasis       of community workers.
                  (health promotion, smog alerts, etc.), but argued that areas
                  such as infectious diseases would benefit from a broader,       Conversely, the Committee has learned that the CCACs
                  provincial approach and responsibility. Health care             in the GTA did not have ready access to infection control
                  providers suggested that government should undertake a          expertise or standardized protocols for dealing with SARS-
                  review of Public Health activities with the goal of redis-      like situations. The Victorian Order of Nurses took a
                  tributing and clearly identifying responsibilities of local     number of steps that enabled home care nurses to partici-
                  public health units and the provincial Public Health            pate effectively in the outbreak response. However, the
                  Branch of the OMHLTC. Respondents felt that roles,              home care system in general was not adequately integrated
                  responsibilities, and accountabilities needed to be clearly     or prepared for an outbreak of this nature.
                  defined and understood.
S A R S




                                                                                  During SARS II, the OMHLTC announced that the
                  Hospitals                                                       Leisureworld Brampton Woods facility would provide
                                                                                  services for patients, particularly from the SARS Alliance
                  As one CEO indicated, the management of any new
                                                                                  hospitals, that no longer required hospital care. Some
                  infectious disease in the absence of a scientific consensus
f r o m




                                                                                  informants felt that the same result could have been
                  on diagnostic criteria, etiology or treatment creates both
                                                                                  achieved with better outcomes (patients in facilities
                  apprehension and new challenges for hospitals and
                                                                                  closer to home and more appropriate settings) if the
                  hospital staff in responding to the illness.
                                                                                  Ministry had utilized the resources of the CCACs.
L e a r n i n g




                  144       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

Inter-Organizational Interaction                                 reportable diseases at the individual case level, and
Respondents reported that no system existed prior to the         providers are required to report such information to the
SARS outbreak for communication of routine infectious            public health units, Public Health does not have clear
disease alerts from Health Canada to the operational             enough responsibility to report this information back to
levels of the health system (i.e., to hospitals, long-term       providers. Front-line workers expressed concern that
care [LTC] facilities, CCACs, ambulance services, family         Public Health focused on community contact tracing and
physicians). Hospitals indicated that they had no direct         quarantine to the exclusion of closer interaction with
communication from Health Canada regarding SARS.                 hospitals to identify how their processes and practices
                                                                 might be contributing to nosocomial infections.
Respondents also indicated that there was a lack of
clarity regarding responsibility for alerting the various        Respondents believed that Health Canada should establish
components of the health system to infectious disease            a surveillance role that enables it to accumulate and analyze
risks when they are identified. Virtually all informants         the locally-collected information, and establish a communi-
identified the need for a clear statement and assignment         cation process that alerts provincial public health units
of responsibility for providing infectious disease alerts to     about unusual patterns in an appropriate form for
each of the components of the health system including:           dissemination back to providers. Finally, relevant WHO
                                                                 information should be analysed in concert with the
• regional public health units;                                  locally collected information in the surveillance of
                                                                 unusual patterns.
• family physicians;
• ambulance;                                                     In sum, post-SARS, clinical and public health leaders in
                                                                 the Toronto area were unambiguous in supporting an
• hospitals;                                                     integrated and regional system of surveillance, reporting,
• CCACs; and                                                     and outbreak management for infectious diseases. Front-
                                                                 line roundtable participants similarly urged the establish-
• LTC facilities.                                                ment of coordinated outbreak management under a
                                                                 single authority.
Several individuals suggested that such alerts must be in
a format that is readily digestible by the different audiences   8B.3 Emergency Structure/Planning
that receive them. Further, the recipients themselves
require a process to receive and appropriately disseminate       Due to the nature of the SARS emergency, there was
such alerts. A number of individuals identified the              some initial confusion/frustration between the POC,




                                                                                                                                 C a n a d a
Coroners’ reports as an example of dissemination that            populated by individuals prepared broadly for emergency
works reasonably well: clearly labeled reports, identifying      response, and the OMHLTC MAG with the content
particular professionals who would have an interest in           knowledge to address the SARS emergency. The POC,
the specific findings and recommendations, and a process         which had not previously been activated, had not
to disseminate results.                                          developed a process to share responsibility. The POC and
                                                                 the OMHLTC MAG ultimately amalgamated and situated




                                                                                                                                 i n
Feedback regarding interaction with WHO was unequivocal:         themselves in the same physical location. Respondents
Health Canada has responsibility for liaison with WHO            stated that this accommodation by the POC to the


                                                                                                                                 H e a l t h
and provinces and Health Canada must collaborate to              greater expertise of the OMHLTC significantly improved
meet our international obligations. Health Canada should         the functioning of the POC. This occurred within 72
communicate relevant WHO information to provincial               hours of the declaration of the emergency.
Public Health Branches and local public health units. If
Health Canada is departing from international recommen-          The command-and-control structure of the POC, however,
                                                                                                                                 P u b l i c



dations (as in the SARS diagnostic criteria), it must follow     had not anticipated sharing responsibility/authority with
a process that builds consensus and credibility with             a lead Ministry. There was perception that the roles of
unambiguous explanations to all concerned.                       the Commissioner of Public Safety and the Commissioner
                                                                 of Public Health/Chief Medical Officer of Health overlapped,
Communication protocols regarding infectious diseases            and it was unclear which position was ultimately respon-
                                                                                                                                 o f




must include information flow in both directions: from           sible for the management of the emergency. Respondents
local to provincial to federal levels and from the federal       reported that this lack of clarity in leadership led to
                                                                                                                                 R e n e w a l




level back. Although local public health units have the          confusion in the field.
responsibility to collect infectious disease information for



..........................................................................................                               145
                  .................................................................................................

                  It was also noted that the various areas within each           government. Rather, experts from across the province
                  Ministry had identified only one individual per area to        could be identified in advance and take part in exercises
                  populate the POC and the MAGs; there were no alternates.       to pre-determine relevant emergency protocols.
                  This quickly proved inadequate given a 24/7 workload.
                  Below the level of the POC and the MAG, there appeared         Emergency plans should also consider compensation
                  to be little infrastructure to assist in the workings of the   issues. Respondents noted that neither at the provincial
                  MAGs in support of the POC or to support the POC itself.       nor ministerial level had emergency planning made
                                                                                 advance provisions for compensation of those individuals
                  Further, areas of expertise were missing. Insufficient input   required to respond to the emergency, as well as those
                  from the acute care sector meant that some of the early        affected by the particular emergency.
                  directives demonstrated a lack of understanding of the
                  workings of either the health care system as a whole or the    Again consistent with recommendations in Chapter 5,
                  individual components of the system. Hospital respondents      it was also suggested that the federal government be
                  reported frustration with early directives that were           involved with the emergency planning of provincial
                  unrealistic and often not possible to implement.               governments to ensure that the federal role in various
                                                                                 emergency situations is identified ahead of time.
                  Consistent with findings and recommendations in
                  Chapter 5, respondents suggested that a process be             Respondents identified the lack of any formal process or
                  established to share the authority vested in the POC with      previous human resource planning for recruiting or sec-
                  a lead Ministry with content knowledge of the particular       onding staff to public health units in the event of an emer-
                  disaster. This process should include a clear statement of     gency. It was almost universally felt that there is insufficient
                  the position/person that has ultimate authority for a          capacity in local public health units to address emergency
                  given emergency. Most recommended against a shared             situations. Respondents were grateful that London and
                  responsibility during a crisis. It was also noted that more    Hamilton provided teams to assist the GTA public health
                  than one individual from each Ministry should be               units and noted that individuals were re-deployed internally
                  identified to support the POC and the MAGs.                    to provide additional focus on the SARS situation. Public
                                                                                 health units reported a lack of physicians with appropriate
                  Several respondents also raised the question as to whether     public health training, and some of those with this type
                  or not a provincial emergency actually needed to be            of training were not available to the local units, as they
                  declared in the SARS outbreak. They felt that the POC          had been seconded to the OMHLTC for the emergency.
                  was a cumbersome structure for this particular emergency
                  given that the response mostly required the efforts of a       A number of individuals suggested that there should be the
                  single Ministry. Others noted, however, that the declaration   ability to dispatch a team of professionals to the epicentre
                  of the emergency was necessary to provide the government       of a major outbreak if requested to do so. Such a team
                  with the authority to make decisions and issue needed          would be specifically trained to assess the outbreak and if
                  directives. As an alternative, informants suggested that       necessary identify additional resources that could be accessed
                  key Ministries might develop their own individual emer-        to contain the situation. The services provided by this team
                  gency plans that provided the government with relevant         might range from infection control advice and specific staff
                  authority to act and that such Ministry-specific plans         education to actual patient care staffing. However, several
                  need not involve the entire POC apparatus. If criteria for     respondents felt that sufficient health human resources do
                  identifying Provincial versus ‘Ministerial’ emergencies        not exist for such an approach. It was suggested that an
                  could be set, this would allow for a more graded response      assessment of the expertise required to deal with infectious
                  rooted in sectoral expertise. Many felt that the SARS          diseases be made and specific policies put in place to
                  Operations Centre functioned more effectively than did         encourage the training of a sufficient number of such
S A R S




                  the general Provincial Operations Centre.                      professionals.

                  It was also widely suggested that both the provincial and      Many hospital respondents noted that emergency
                  ministerial emergency plans consider closely the expertise     preparedness policies and procedures are developed and
f r o m




                  that would be required in various emergency situations         tested at the level of the individual institution. No
                  and identify ahead of time individuals with such expertise.    regional policies exist and there is little evidence of
                  As the SARS Scientific Advisory Committee demonstrated,        consistency of protocols among institutions.
                  such experts need not be employees of the provincial
L e a r n i n g




                  146       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

There was a sense among focus group participants and
interviewees that cooperation among hospitals was inade-         E     X H I B I T        8 . 1
quate to the needs of the SARS emergency. A number of
                                                                 Hospital Survey Responses re Existence of Formal
individual examples of sharing (non-union) staff with
                                                                 Protocols for Outbreak Management
particular expertise were identified as positive exceptions.
Participants noted a particular need for greater                Hospital       Acute Care with         Non-Acute with
cooperation among hospitals in the following areas:             Location       Formal Outbreak        Formal Outbreak
                                                                (County)           Policy                  Policy
• transferring/accepting non-SARS critical care patients;
  and                                                                         Yes   No % Yes          Yes   No    % Yes

• sharing staff (and physicians) with particular expertise.     Durham          4     0   100%          0     1     0%

Many suggested that the absence of a pre-existing plan or       Halton          5     0   100%          0     0
approach to cooperation among hospitals in an emergency
                                                                Peel            3     0   100%          0     0
situation was an impediment to effective action during
the SARS outbreak. This was identified by several respon-       Toronto        11     2    85%          7     1    88%
dents both within and external to the hospitals.
                                                                York            2     1    67%          0     0
In sum, it was clear that the Toronto public health
system could not manage both the SARS crisis and carry          Total          25     3    89%          7     2    78%
on its day-to-day business. It was also clear that Toronto
could not deal with more than one crisis at a time and         Two of the three Toronto hospitals that reported no formal
that the system would crash if faced with one additional       outbreak policy were SARS facility level 3 (the highest
large-scale crisis. Without a pre-existing mechanism to        level) hospitals during the outbreak, while the third was
share resources within the system and no surge capacity,       level 2.
Toronto was overwhelmed.
                                                               The survey also asked hospitals to provide a copy of their
Managerial and front-line respondents alike urged that         protocols for outbreak management. Eighteen facilities
all levels of government invest in front-line public health    submitted copies out of the 32 facilities that reported the
capacity, in addition to, and not at the expense of,           existence of such protocols.
existing resources and core services. Both clinical teams




                                                                                                                             C a n a d a
and outbreak teams are needed when dealing with a              The protocols received were of variable detail, clarity,
health emergency. An adequate and consistent surge             quality and length. There are very different policies and
capacity across Canada must be developed and requires          procedures for dealing with outbreaks of infectious disease
the collaboration of provincial/territorial and municipal      among the hospitals. In most cases, the protocols did not
governments to ensure that investments are made and            appear to provide sufficient information or instruction to
needs met.                                                     define how to manage severe outbreaks. Most protocols




                                                                                                                             i n
                                                               had not been recently revised. Front-line respondents
Code Orange is the internationally recognized code for         particularly emphasized the need for standard protocols


                                                                                                                             H e a l t h
an external disaster/emergency. Each hospital has              and practice algorithms in outbreak management.
developed its own policies and procedures to address
Code Orange situations. A number of hospitals                  Some respondents indicated in interviews and focus groups
commented that Code Orange was not intended to deal            that SARS showed that many hospitals, especially
with an outbreak of infectious disease; nor was it the         community hospitals, are unprepared to deal with serious
                                                                                                                             P u b l i c


most appropriate response for all hospitals in the system.     outbreaks of infectious disease. They have relatively weak
                                                               infection control functions and processes. Finally, some
The survey conducted as part of this study requested that      respondents urged that basic standards of cleanliness and
hospitals state whether there were formal protocols for        standardized infection control practices and protocols be
outbreak management in place prior to the SARS                 mandated across the health care system, including
outbreak. Almost 90% of the acute care hospitals and
                                                                                                                             o f




                                                               hospitals, LTC, home care, and the offices of
78% of the non-acute hospitals reported having a formal        independent health professionals. Some suggested that
outbreak policy in place (Exhibit 8.1).
                                                                                                                             R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                           147
                  .................................................................................................

                  there be requirements, particularly for hospitals, to                          8B.4 Hospital Facilities
                  provide continuing education on basic precautions for
                  physicians, nurses and other health professionals.                             The hospital survey included questions regarding the
                  Analogies were drawn to basic fire training required on                        preparedness of the hospital facilities to accommodate
                  an annual basis.                                                               SARS patients. Exhibit 8.2 shows the number of single
                                                                                                 patient rooms with anterooms and/or negative pressure
                  The lack of any regional hospital planning for emergency                       in the GTA and Toronto acute care hospitals. Overall,
                  preparedness was also heavily criticized. It was strongly                      3.8% of Toronto and GTA acute care hospital beds are in
                  suggested that the emergency response plans of hospitals                       single negative pressure rooms. Only 1.0% of Toronto
                  should include regional planning and cooperation. Such                         and GTA non-acute care hospital beds are in single
                  planning must include both inter-hospital participation                        negative pressure rooms.
                  and other providers and stakeholders as appropriate
                  (i.e., CCACs, LTC facilities, Public Health, etc.).                            Toronto hospitals have the highest percent of rooms with
                                                                                                 negative pressure (4.6% of acute beds, 1.0% of non-acute
                  A number of hospitals reported making use of existing                          beds). The range in the percent of acute care beds
                  networks, such as the Toronto East Emergency Network                           equipped with negative pressure for individual hospitals
                  and the Child Health Network, to assist with communi-                          (shown in Exhibit 8.3) is from 0% to 12%.
                  cations and in some cases patient transfer.
                                                                                                 Of the 28 Toronto and GTA hospitals with emergency
                  CritiCall3  was essential for a number of required patient                     departments, 6 reported in the survey that they do not
                  transfers. Many hospitals, however, suggested that the                         have an infection control area. The hospitals without
                  powers of CritiCall to enforce acceptance of patients by                       infection control areas in their emergency departments
                  facilities with open beds needed to be strengthened.                           are distributed as follows:
                  Numerous situations were reported wherein hospitals
                  had difficulty transferring patients both with and                             • two in York;
                  without SARS.                                                                  • three in Toronto; and
                                                                                                 • one in Durham.


                     E   X H I B I T               8 . 2
                     Hospital Survey Responses re Anterooms and Negative Pressure Rooms in Acute Care Hospitals by Hospital Location

                                  Acute                                                        Hospital Location (County)

                     Anterooms?           Negative              Durham              Halton                Peel           Toronto                York            Grand
                                          Pressure                                                                                                               Total

                          Yes                No                         –                  8                31                  7                 12                58

                          Yes                Yes                      11                 14                 22                147                 20              214

                          No                 Yes                        3                13                  2                140                  2              160
S A R S




                                        Total Beds:                  552                830              1,445             6,254                800             9,881

                    % Beds w/ Anterooms                            2.0%               2.7%               3.7%               2.5%               4.0%              2.8%

                    % Beds w/ Neg. Press                           2.5%               3.3%               1.7%               4.6%               2.8%              3.8%
f r o m




                    % Beds w/ Both                                 2.0%               1.7%               1.5%               2.4%               2.5%              2.2%
L e a r n i n g




                  3 The Ontario CritiCall Program facilitates emergency patient referrals by assisting physicians in community hospitals with access to the resources
                    of larger tertiary care hospitals in their regions. Management of the program is provided by Hamilton Health Sciences (HHS).



                  148           .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

                                                             entire facilities as ‘level 3’ on the Ministry’s SARS scale,
 E    X H I B I T         8 . 3                              rather than specific units of a hospital where a breach
                                                             had occurred, led to confusion and a transient stigmati-
 Variation in Percent of Toronto and GTA Hospital Acute
                                                             zation of entire institutions. A number of patients were
 Beds in Single Negative Pressure Rooms (only
                                                             refused, despite the transfer protocols, simply because
 hospitals with at least 100 acute beds)
                                                             they were coming from a level 3 facility.
 14%
                                                             Given the impact and potential increase in prevalence of
 12%                                                         infectious disease outbreaks, a number of suggestions
                                                             regarding appropriate infrastructure were also brought
 10%                                                         forward. Specifically, respondents suggested that each
                                                             emergency room be equipped with isolation facilities
  8%                                                         with appropriate air handling and anterooms. They also
                                                             suggested that the number of negative pressure rooms in
  6%                                                         hospitals be expanded. These facilities would, in the
                                                             event of an outbreak, be temporary treatment areas prior
  4%                                                         to transfer to a regional facility (or facilities) with
                                                             responsibility for caring for and isolating patients with
  2%                                                         the infectious disease. If patients could be congregated
                                                             in regionally-designated institutions, the rest of the
     0%                                                      system could carry on in addressing the other health and
          A B C D E F G H I J K L MN O P Q R S T U VW
                                                             health service needs of the population.

The survey results show that 18% of monitored                It was suggested that one or more institutions in each
intermediate/critical care beds are equipped for infection   region of the province should have the necessary
control. The percent equipped for infection control          infrastructure to isolate a large number of patients in an
ranges from 10% in Halton to 28% in Peel.                    emergency situation. These institutions would require
                                                             both the facilities to accommodate a large number of
Only 30% of hospitals with autopsy suites reported that      patients suffering from infectious disease, and the staff
their suites conformed to CDC guidelines.                    required to treat them.

All hospitals as well as front-line workers commented on     If regional programs in infectious diseases were established,




                                                                                                                             C a n a d a
the lack of capacity to accommodate the surges in            the institution(s) with the facilities for addressing the
demand that often accompany emergencies. If it needs         outbreak should also be the locus for the program. Many
to operate regularly at 90% to 95% of capacity (as is the    suggested that it would be unrealistic to expect a single
case for acute medical beds), the system is unable to        institution to be home to sufficient infectious disease and
absorb a large influx of patients associated with an         infection control expertise to deal with a crisis. Rather, a
emergency while still maintaining normal activity levels.




                                                                                                                             i n
                                                             network of providers should be created that could
In addition, the rest of the system lacks capacity to        collectively focus on each outbreak and realign themselves
absorb volume if some hospitals have to reduce volumes       to ensure that the needed resources are available to the


                                                                                                                             H e a l t h
to deal with an emergency, as occurred during SARS           regional facility in the event of an outbreak.
when some hospitals’ ICUs became compromised. Some
hospitals did indicate that the elective elements of         8B.5 Communications Structures
normal activity could be temporarily suspended, if needed,
                                                                  and Processes
to provide sufficient resources to deal with the emergent
                                                                                                                             P u b l i c



situation. However, such interruptions would have to be      As noted, respondents reported that there was not a
brief and accompanied by provision for catch-up capacity.    seamless and effective system prior to the SARS outbreak
                                                             for communication of routine infectious disease alerts
The SARS Alliance facilities noted that, with no regional    from Health Canada to the operational levels of the
disaster planning in place or previously identified          health system (i.e., to hospitals, LTC facilities, CCACs,
                                                                                                                             o f




methods for cooperation between facilities, it was very      ambulance services, family physicians).
difficult to transfer non-disaster (non-SARS) related
                                                                                                                             R e n e w a l




patients to other facilities. The concept of designating




..........................................................................................                            149
                  .................................................................................................

                  The interviewees and managerial/physician focus group                           • length of time required to issue directives, which in
                  participants indicated that communications related to                             turn was attributed to delays occasioned by the internal
                  SARS came from various components of the health care                              review and approval process;
                  system, with no clearly identified source and often with
                                                                                                  • inconsistency in directives;
                  conflicting and/or out-of-date advice. Communications
                  came from:                                                                      • initial directives not numbered or signed; and
                                                                                                  • lack of a pre-defined process to clarify directives.
                  • Public Health Commissioner;
                  • Regional Public Health Units;                                                 Some of these criticisms are not entirely consistent with
                                                                                                  others; speed in issuing directives may lead to lack of
                  • Provincial Operations Centre;
                                                                                                  clarity while delays led to criticisms about lack of leader-
                  • SARS Operations Centre;                                                       ship. Regardless, the criticisms speak to an opportunity
                                                                                                  for improved performance.
                  • Ontario Hospital Association;
                  • Ontario Medical Association;                                                  Respondents had a mixed response to the mechanism/
                                                                                                  media used for communications by the POC. Many
                  • Ministry of Health and Long-term Care;
                                                                                                  stakeholders expressed frustration with the length and
                  • Public Health Branch, OMHLTC;                                                 frequency of teleconferences. However, many also stated
                                                                                                  that this was a timely method of disseminating quickly
                  • Institutions Branch, OMHLTC;
                                                                                                  changing information. After the first few days,
                  • Ministry of Public Safety and Security; and                                   respondents reported that the effectiveness of the
                                                                                                  teleconferences improved.
                  • Health Canada.
                                                                                                  Some respondents felt that the difficulties associated with
                  There was neither the mechanism nor the discipline
                                                                                                  the communications process could have been alleviated
                  required to consolidate and control communications
                                                                                                  if the OMHLTC had its own emergency preparedness plan
                  within the POC. Theoretically, the POC should have been
                                                                                                  separate from that of the POC. It was overwhelmingly
                  the single source for communications for all providers.
                                                                                                  suggested that regardless of the emergency situation
                  This was not the case. Various reasons for this were
                                                                                                  declared, responsibility for communications should be
                  postulated; chief among them was a lack of clarity of role
                                                                                                  identified clearly in the various scenarios and that
                  and jurisdiction and a need for organizations to be seen
                                                                                                  mechanisms be established to enforce a single communi-
                  to be active in supporting their constituencies.
                                                                                                  cations source.
                  As noted above, the field also heavily and repeatedly
                                                                                                  Numerous comments were received highlighting the
                  criticized both the process of issuing directives and the
                                                                                                  need to ensure that all interested stakeholders receive
                  content of directives from the POC. Front-line staff
                                                                                                  appropriate communications. Clearly, interested stake-
                  emphasized that, especially early in the outbreak, it
                                                                                                  holders will vary depending on the situation. However,
                  appeared that those formulating directives were not
                                                                                                  many respondents suggested that appropriate contact
                  sufficiently knowledgeable about the practicality of
                                                                                                  sheets could be prepared ahead of any particular emergency
                  implementing these practices in the clinical setting.
                                                                                                  situation to ensure, for example, that family physicians
                                                                                                  and local Public Health Units4 receive information at the
                  Criticisms also included:
                                                                                                  initiation and throughout an outbreak situation.
                  • lack of clarity around who the POC was and who was
S A R S




                                                                                                  Finally, almost all respondents felt that a process must be
                    directing its activities;
                                                                                                  in place to attempt to minimize frequent changes to
                  • frustration that teleconferencing did not allow partici-                      information and conflicting information in an emergency.
                    pants to know who was participating in the POC, and
f r o m




                    whether the participation was informed by science or
                    political necessities;
L e a r n i n g




                  4 It is curious that initial directions from the POC were not made available to public health units. CCACs reported providing information to public health
                    units that the public health units did not seem to be receiving directly.



                  150         .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

In sum, the overwhelming sense obtained by the consultants     The role assumed by most public health units was focused
was that SARS demonstrated the importance of effective         on front-line containment of the outbreak. As noted
communication during an emergency, both domestically           earlier, along with their front-line staff, several hospital
and internationally. Poor communication during the             leaders had expected advice from the public health units
SARS outbreaks may have contributed to the imposition          on infection control and quarantine procedures and
of a travel advisory by WHO, harming Canada’s economy          enforcement; these expectations were not consistently
and reputation. The use of a myriad of spokespeople            met. Providers were unsure if this was or should be a
speaking to the media at the same time with messages           role for provincial or regional level Public Health.
that sometimes conflicted did nothing to instill
confidence in the public health system and undermined          Confidentiality concerns raised by Public Health were
the credibility of those at the helm. Respondents noted        shared by health care providers who argued that they,
that uneven communication to other affected sectors,           too, have a responsibility and tradition of maintaining
such as the travel sector, created confusion and fear for      confidentiality. Hence, some sharing of information
both the public and people working in those other              should have been possible.
sectors. The travel sector, severely affected by SARS,
should have been kept better informed and better               Family Physicians
utilized in disseminating information and easing public
                                                               There was no regular connection between Public Health
anxiety. Pharmacists as front-line health care
                                                               and family physicians during the outbreak. The role of
professionals also could have been better utilized to
                                                               Public Health in relation to physicians’ offices is not
convey important messages.
                                                               clear. Those contacted for this study indicated that they
                                                               have no relationship with Public Health and received no
Public Health                                                  communication from their local public health unit.
There was no effective mechanism for medical officers          Family physicians were unaware of the outbreak until
of health [MOH] to communicate amongst themselves              after it had occurred and were unclear what precautions
and to coordinate their actions during the outbreak.           should be taken in their practices and unclear whose
Conference calls among the MOH were arranged but not           responsibility it was to provide them with such
consistently attended by all units. Many clinical leaders      information.
commented that the MOH in the various regions were
disconnected from each other.                                  Family physicians were also largely unaware of Health
                                                               Canada infectious disease alerts. They did not know
Participants also expressed frustration that communications    whose role it is to provide such alerts to family physicians.




                                                                                                                               C a n a d a
from the public health units were non-existent or
sporadic; in their view, much information was provided         Most family physicians reported learning of the outbreak
to Public Health, but little information came from Public      initially through the media. Formal communications
Health. Hospitals reported receiving inquiries from            with the SARS emergency infrastructure were non-existent.
multiple public health units for the same information          Initial communications (such as the location of SARS
regarding the same patient. When notified that the infor-      clinics) came from the media; subsequently, the Ontario




                                                                                                                               i n
mation had already been provided to a different public         Medical Association provided communications that
health unit, hospitals were told that the units did not        respondents found useful and effective. Those actively


                                                                                                                               H e a l t h
have mechanisms to share the information amongst               involved with a hospital received information and advice
themselves and that it was easier to collect it again from     from the hospital. There was no direct communication
the hospital.                                                  from Public Health to physicians’ offices.

Some hospitals anticipated that the role of Public Health      Community Care Access Centres
                                                                                                                               P u b l i c


was to consolidate, analyze and communicate back in
                                                               CCACs were not receiving any official infectious disease
some useful fashion the information that it was collecting.
                                                               communications from any source prior to the Toronto
Public Health informants felt that they could not share
                                                               outbreak. Like others in the system, CCACs have no
information because of confidentiality restrictions, because
                                                               direct relationship with Health Canada, although they do
they did not have sufficient resources to share informa-
                                                               monitor Health Canada information for product alerts.
tion, or simply because it was not their responsibility to
                                                                                                                               o f




                                                               It was unclear to CCACs whose role it is to alert them
communicate back to providers. It is unclear, therefore
                                                               about emerging infectious diseases or outbreaks.
whose role this was. Either expectations must be modified
                                                                                                                               R e n e w a l




                                                               Respondents reported that Public Health and the CCACs
or mechanisms found to close the communications gap.
                                                               sometimes provided conflicting information to CCAC



..........................................................................................                             151
                  .................................................................................................

                  clients. These members of the public were accordingly          A number of respondents felt that more input from the
                  unclear if the CCACs or Public Health were the appropriate     front-line staff actually dealing with SARS patients might
                  source for information.                                        have improved the practicality of the directions from the
                                                                                 POC and the SOC.
                  Hospitals
                                                                                 Front-line respondents also commented on internal
                  No hospital reported receiving infectious disease alerts
                                                                                 communications. They appreciated the effort made by
                  from Health Canada or having a formal system in place
                                                                                 institutions to communicate creatively by formal and
                  to receive or scan for such alerts. A number of hospitals
                                                                                 informal channels, but, consistent with comments in
                  reported awareness of Health Canada product alerts and
                                                                                 Chapter 5 on risk communication, urged that spokes-
                  bulletins, but they had no formal link to Health Canada.
                                                                                 people acknowledge ‘the unknowns’ rather than hold
                  Hospitals reported that they became aware of the Toronto
                                                                                 back information.
                  SARS outbreak through the media and communications
                  from the Public Health Branch of the OMHLTC. One CEO
                                                                                 Many indicated that there is a need to strengthen the
                  stated that in the UK public health is more integrated
                                                                                 relationship and communication between public health
                  with other elements of the health system. He had learned
                                                                                 and hospitals. Although there is a statutory requirement
                  that in the UK, public health informed hospitals about
                                                                                 that representatives of the MOH sit on infection control
                  the emergence of a new respiratory illness from China in
                                                                                 committees in hospitals, these individuals often lack a
                  February 2003, whereas in Toronto, hospitals did not know
                                                                                 strong clinical background and may therefore have little
                  about SARS until the patients contracted the disease at
                                                                                 understanding of hospitals. As a result, they are unable
                  The Scarborough Hospital, Grace Division in March 2003.
                                                                                 to effectively liaise between the hospital and public
                                                                                 health or provide useful advice to the hospital. Most
                  Virtually all hospitals commented that throughout SARS
                                                                                 hospitals in particular felt that they had little access to
                  I, it was not clear who was sending directives to the
                                                                                 regional public health officials. And when they did have
                  hospital. Early directives were unsigned. Later directives
                                                                                 access, hospitals were concerned that public health staff
                  were signed by both the Commission of Public Health/
                                                                                 may not have the necessary knowledge, skills or
                  Chief MOH and the Commissioner of Public Safety and
                                                                                 experience to provide appropriate advice to the hospitals
                  Security. In either event, some hospitals were not initially
                                                                                 regarding infection control.
                  clear how to get clarifications of the directives or raise
                  concerns about them.
                                                                                 Exhibit 8.4 shows the responses from the hospital survey
                                                                                 regarding liaison with Public Health. While most
                  All hospitals commented on confusion arising from:
                                                                                 hospitals (89%) reported regular liaison with Public
                                                                                 Health, in some instances the liaison appeared to be little
                  • receipt of information from different sources;
                                                                                 more than the mandatory communication regarding
                  • conflicting information;                                     reportable communicable diseases or having representatives
                                                                                 on Infection Control Committees. Despite the statutory
                  • frequent changes to information and directives;
                                                                                 requirement, 35% of hospitals did not mention Public
                  • conflicts between directives and expertise and               Health representation on committee structures when
                    experience of staff; and                                     asked to describe how they kept in contact with Public
                                                                                 Health. These findings emphasize the need to ensure
                  • impracticality of directives in the hospital situation.
                                                                                 that there is close liaison between local public health
                                                                                 units and hospital infection control.
                  Administrators and staff at all levels expressed frustration
                  with an inability to implement the directions received.
                                                                                 Also, hospitals and clinical leaders commented critically
S A R S




                  The most common reasons for failing to implement
                                                                                 on the number of requests for information from Public
                  directives were:
                                                                                 Health regarding SARS patients. Hospitals reported
                                                                                 receiving requests for information from more than one
                  • unavailability of supplies identified in directives; and
                                                                                 regional health unit, the Public Health Branch of the
f r o m




                  • timing of receipt of directives (i.e., insufficient notice   OMHLTC as well as from the Ministry per se.
                    to allow implementation).
L e a r n i n g




                  152       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


                                                          8B.7 Health Human Resources
  E     X H I B I T       8 . 4
                                                          A number of hospitals identified insufficient numbers
  GTA and Toronto Hospital Survey Responses re            of specialized staff as a challenge in dealing with the
  Regular Liaison with Public Health                      outbreak. The most commonly cited deficiencies were
                                                          infectious disease specialists, infection control physicians
 Hospital     Hospitals Reporting   Hospitals Reporting
 Location       Regular Liaison      Public Health on
                                                          and hospital epidemiologists.
 (County)      with Public Health    Infection Control
                                        Committee         While 71% of acute care hospitals reported having access
                                                          to a physician trained for infection control, one quarter
                Yes         No        Yes          No     of these hospitals reported that the position was not paid
                                                          and protected, leaving 46% of acute care hospitals without
 Durham           4          1          3           2     a paid and protected infection control position. Only 1
                                                          of 9 (11%) non-acute hospitals had a physician trained
 Halton           4          1          4           1
                                                          for infection control (this position is not paid and
 Peel             3          0          3           0     protected). Collectively, the consultants' survey suggested
                                                          that the Toronto and GTA hospitals have at most 7 FTE
 Toronto         20          1         13           8     paid and protected specialized infection control physicians
                                                          (or 0.7 FTE positions per 1,000 acute care beds). This may
 York             2          1          1           2     be an over-estimate based on the Committee’s own tally.
                                                          The number of fully-trained hospital epidemiologists is
 Total           33          4         24          13
                                                          even lower.
 % Yes                89%                    65%
                                                          These observations clearly reinforce findings from Chapter 7
                                                          about the state of infection control human resources and the
8B.6 Surveillance                                         need for action as regards accreditation standards or regional/
                                                          ministry regulations to strengthen infection control.
Surveillance emerged as another area of diffused
responsibility. Local public health was geared towards
                                                          Numerous individuals noted that the nature of the
outbreak containment; provincial Public Health did not
                                                          collective agreements makes it virtually impossible to
take on the role of the collection point for assembling
                                                          have full-time employees of one institution work across
and facilitating the analysis of the cumulating data.
                                                          multiple organizations, unless each of the organizations
There is no body with the jurisdiction at the overall




                                                                                                                            C a n a d a
                                                          employs the person directly. Sharing of staff in emergency
system level to:
                                                          contravenes existing collective agreements. Front-line
                                                          staff and their organizations signaled a high degree of
• accumulate and analyze information definitively or
                                                          dedication and a willingness to engage in planning for
  facilitate such analysis by others;
                                                          emergencies, along with dissatisfaction with ad hoc and
• identify and communicate findings of the analysis of    post hoc human resource practices during the SARS




                                                                                                                            i n
  patterns of occurrence;                                 outbreak.



                                                                                                                            H e a l t h
• identify and communicate alerts of unusual patterns;
                                                          Several hospitals identified that the high percentage of
  and
                                                          nursing staff working part-time or casual hours through
• develop contingency plans.                              agencies was a problem during SARS, a point echoed by
                                                          front-line focus groups. These types of employment
Although some public health units reported that they      practices provide a flexible workforce for the peaks and
                                                                                                                            P u b l i c



were assisting hospitals with syndromic surveillance to   valleys in demand inherent in hospitals, but result in staff
identify patients with SARS-like symptoms, hospitals      being employees of several institutions simultaneously.
indicated that these cases were not confirmed by public   Front-line workers highlighted the importance of a stable
health if an epidemiologic link to a confirmed case was   and permanent workforce, rather than reliance on more
not present. Some hospitals felt that the focus on        costly agency personnel. Although a great deal of
                                                                                                                            o f




epidemiologic links blunted their vigilance.              publicity centred around the potential increased risk of
                                                          infection being transferred across organizations arising
                                                                                                                            R e n e w a l




                                                          from this practice, respondents were not aware of a
                                                          single case of SARS transmitted from health care workers



..........................................................................................                          153
                  .................................................................................................

                  working in multiple institutions (in fact, it appears there    The SARS Alliance hospitals chose to provide double-time
                  was only one such case). Restrictions on movement of           pay to those individuals working in SARS affected areas/
                  staff during the outbreak may have mitigated this              SARS units. The OMHLTC did not sanction this action.
                  potential problem. However, the challenge associated           It was heavily criticized from an equity perspective since
                  with such arrangements arises from:                            other hospitals that treated SARS patients did not provide
                                                                                 the same benefit to their staff. Further, staff were provided
                  • staff needing to be familiar with the different infection    the additional salary whether or not the SARS unit they
                    control policies and procedures of multiple organizations;   worked on actually treated SARS patients. As a result, in
                                                                                 some cases staff treating SARS patients received no added
                  • difficulty engendering the level of commitment to
                                                                                 compensation benefit, while others who did not treat
                    an organization that is required to respond to
                                                                                 SARS patients did receive additional compensation.
                    emergencies; and
                  • difficulty for a hospital to secure additional shifts        The lack of intensive care nursing professionals, and the
                    when employees have commitments to work at                   centralized response to this challenge, resulted in compen-
                    multiple organizations.                                      sation practices that were also heavily criticized. A contract
                                                                                 between the province and Med-Emerg was established to
                  There were various issues identified with compensation         provide critical care nursing staff to hospitals upon their
                  throughout the SARS experience. Some hospitals reported        request. Respondents noted that the nurses employed by
                  being ‘required’ to pay physicians additional stipends to      Med-Emerg were compensated at rates up to three times
                  induce them to work with SARS patients. The Ontario            that of ‘regular’ hospital-based critical care nurses, causing
                  Medical Association and the OMHLTC, working through            equity concerns. Front-line representatives expressed
                  the Physicians Services Committee, have developed two          concern about both differential compensation and incon-
                  programs for physicians whose incomes were affected by         sistent perquisites. Because of uneven pay scales, some
                  SARS. These programs are the SARS Advance Payment              hospitals felt compelled to offer their own staff the same
                  Program and the SARS Income Stabilization Program.             premium that the OMHLTC was paying to agency staff
                  Details of these programs were made available to               from Med-Emerg. Further, a number of hospitals reported
                  physicians on the Ontario Medical Association website          that nurses who would otherwise have been regularly
                  in a series of communications dated June 26, 2003.             available to the institution were recruited by Med-Emerg.
                                                                                 Finally, hospitals reported limited flexibility in the staffing
                  In the SARS Advance Payment Program, physicians may            offered by Med-Emerg; the hospital was unable to modify
                  apply for advance payment against future billings to           staffing requirements and consequently, they sometimes
                  address current shortfalls in income due to service reduc-     found themselves in the uncharacteristic position of having
                  tions as a result of SARS. In this program, a physician        too many staff. Despite these criticisms, as indicated in
                  whose income is less than 80% of average monthly               Chapter 2, Med-Emerg was understood to have filled
                  billings may receive payments to make up the difference        serious gaps in staffing in a very difficult period.
                  between the earned amount and the threshold of 80% of
                  average billings. These advances will be deducted from         During the outbreak, nurses were restricted from working
                  future payments. This program applies to the period            in multiple institutions to control the risk of SARS
                  from March 14, 2003 to June 30, 2003.                          moving from one hospital to the next. This provision
                                                                                 served to reduce the incomes of nurses who relied on
                  The SARS Income Stabilization Program applies to               income from multiple organizations. Respondents noted
                  physicians whose incomes were reduced because of               that the OMHLTC has not volunteered to compensate
                  quarantine, reductions in hospital operating capacity or       these nurses in the same way that it has guaranteed the
                  reduced practice volumes in and/or outside the hospital        incomes of most physicians who work in hospitals.
S A R S




                  setting. All physicians affected by SARS are eligible to
                  receive payments equivalent to the difference between          These findings all highlight the need for regularized
                  the amount earned and 80% of average annual billings.          processes for sharing and compensating staff during
                  Physicians who worked in hospitals that were specifically      emergencies.
f r o m




                  treating SARS patients are eligible for payment of the
                  difference between the amount earned and 100% of               Occupational health and safety concerns emerged clearly
                  average annual billings. Top up to 80% applies to the          from focus groups with front-line workers. Existing
                  entire SARS emergency period. Top up to 100% applies           occupational health and safety committees were not
L e a r n i n g




                  to the period from May 23, 2003 to June 30, 2003.              engaged; necessary equipment was sometimes unavailable
                                                                                 or suboptimal, and some administrators lifted
                                                                                 precautions prematurely. The Committee understands

                  154       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

that ambulance personnel and paramedics also had                  are elective, this restriction had the greatest impact on
serious concerns about protective equipment during the            surgical volumes. The physical limitations on access to
SARS outbreak.                                                    hospitals and the increasing public awareness of the risks
                                                                  of SARS in health care facilities meant that visits to
8B.8 Psychosocial Implications of SARS                            emergency departments [ED] were also greatly reduced.

Many respondents also discussed the significant psychosocial
                                                                  8C.1 Impacts on Emergency Department
implications of SARS and related stories that illustrated the
palpable fear among both health workers and the public.
                                                                       Visit/Admission Volumes
The impact of SARS on individuals working within the              Exhibit 8.5 shows the year-over-year percent change from
health system should not be underestimated. It included:          2002 to 2003 in ED visits, by month and hospital
                                                                  location (GTA and Toronto).
• people afraid to go to work in hospitals;
• people afraid to care for SARS patients;                         E       X H I B I T           8 . 5
• people afraid to associate with health care workers, or
                                                                   Reduction in ED Visit Volumes in 2003, Compared to
  even spouses of health care workers, particularly those
                                                                   2002, for Toronto and GTA Acute Care Hospitals, by
  from SARS units;
                                                                   Month
• lingering resentment of colleagues who might not                              Care Hospitals, by Month
  have contributed what was expected;                                       March       April      May       June          Total
                                                                       0
• people feeling helpless, angry, and guilty; and
                                                                    -5
• people experiencing acute social isolation and ostracism.                -6% -6%
                                                                   -10
Many who participated in the interviews and focus
groups suggested that the fear was engendered both by
                                                                   -15
the sensationalism of the media coverage and                                                        -15%
                                                                                                                  -16%       -16%
inconsistent information coming from the provincial and
                                                                   -20
municipal public health officials. Front-line focus group
participants emphasized the need for formal crisis                                                                       -22%
                                                                   -25
communications protocols suited to the unique needs of                                           -24%
each institution and its staff (e.g., remote workers, shift




                                                                                                                                          C a n a d a
                                                                   -30
workers). Much of the fear was simply a reasonable                                   -28% -28%
                                                                                                           -31%
reaction to an unknown but extremely virulent disease.             -35
In spite of these fears, the focus groups yielded many
                                                                               Toronto Total
accounts of heroic efforts of health workers to support
each other and to ensure that all patients received the                        GTA Total




                                                                                                                                          i n
best care possible.

                                                                  During the first full month of the outbreak (April 2003)


                                                                                                                                          H e a l t h
8C. Services Impact and Backlog                                   visits to the ED were 28% below the April 2002 levels for
    Estimates                                                     both the Toronto and the GTA hospitals. After April,
                                                                  ED visits to the GTA hospitals recovered to levels
All focus group participants and interviewees referred to         approximately 15% below the prior year’s level. Visits to
the impact of the SARS outbreak on hospital activity              the ED in Toronto hospitals increased slightly in May (to
                                                                                                                                          P u b l i c



volumes, and the challenges posed in attempting to clear          24% below the prior year), but fell to 31% below the
backlogs. Hospital activity data from 2002 and 2003               prior year in June with SARS II. The hospitals assigned to
were used to document the impact of SARS on the GTA               the SARS Alliance had a 50% reduction in their ED visit
and Toronto hospitals and to estimate the cost to the             volumes in June (after the Alliance had been established).
hospital system to clear the backlog.
                                                                                                                                          o f




                                                                  Exhibit 8.6 shows the overall changes in ED volumes by
The primary impacts on hospital service volumes were              Canadian Triage Acuity Scale [CTAS] scores.
                                                                                                                                          R e n e w a l




the result of the directives to GTA and Toronto hospitals
at the end of March that required that they restrict access
to only critically ill patients. Because most surgical patients

..........................................................................................                                          155
                  .................................................................................................

                                                                                             Overall, during the four-month period, the volumes of
                   E       X H I B I T              8 . 6                                    ED visits with CTAS score 1 (the most urgent cases)
                                                                                             increased by 3% in the GTA hospitals and 12% in the
                   Reduction in ED Visit Volumes in 2003, Compared to
                                                                                             Toronto hospitals. The volumes of ED visits with CTAS
                   2002, by CTAS Score, for Toronto and GTA Acute Care
                                                                                             score 5 (the least urgent cases) decreased by 35% in GTA
                   Hospitals, by Month
                                                                                             hospitals and by 39% in Toronto hospitals.
                           CTAS 1     CTAS 2     CTAS 3    CTAS 4    CTAS 5     Total
                     20                                                                      As would be expected, the ED visit volumes fell the most
                           12%                                                               for the visits that would most likely be considered to be
                     10
                                                                                             deferrable. There is no way to determine whether these
                                 3%
                                                                                             patients who would normally attend and receive care
                       0                                                                     in an ED received care elsewhere, e.g., in a family
                                         -4%                                                 physician’s office or drop-in clinic, or went without care.
                    -10                                                                      Lack of access to OHIP physician service data precluded
                                      -11%          -13%
                                                                                  -16%
                                                                                             this analysis.
                    -20
                                                 -18%         -18%
                                                                               -22%
                                                                                             For medical and mental health patients, the most common
                    -30                                                                      route of entry to the hospital is via the ED5. It would be
                                                           -28%
                                                                        -35%                 expected that the most critically ill patients, who require
                    -40                                                                      admission to hospital for definitive treatment, would
                                                                     -39%
                                                                                             continue to visit the ED and would continue to be
                    -50                                                                      admitted as inpatients. Exhibit 8.7 shows that although
                                 Toronto Total                                               there was an 11.2% decrease in admissions via the ED in
                                 GTA Total                                                   the four months in 2003 compared to the same four
                                                                                             months in 2002, the decrease was exclusively due to
                                                                                             decreases in admission of the least urgent patients.
                                                                                             Admissions of CTAS 1 (resuscitation) patients increased by
                                                                                             8% and admissions of CTAS 2 (emergent) patients
                   E       X H I B I T              8 . 7                                    remained constant.
                   Reduction in Admissions of Patients via the ED in
                   2003, Compared to 2002, by CTAS Score, for Toronto                        The reduction in admissions through the ED is progres-
                   and GTA Acute Care Hospitals                                              sively greater for the CTAS score 3, 4, and 5 visits. This
                                                                                             suggests that the SARS outbreak and the restrictions on
                           CTAS 1     CTAS 2     CTAS 3    CTAS 4    CTAS 5     Total        hospital services led to changes in inpatient admission
                    20
                                                                                             thresholds, and that patients who would have been
                    10      8.4%                                                             previously admitted were not admitted.

                                       0.6%                                                  This study does not assess the impact of the reduction of
                       0
                                                                                             ED visit volumes on the health of the population nor can
                                                                                             it determine whether patients who would otherwise have
                    -10
                                                                               -11.2%        attended the ED were able to receive appropriate care
                                                 -13.9%                                      elsewhere. The sustained reductions in ED visit volumes
                    -20
                                                           -19.3%                            during the outbreak suggest that the Toronto and GTA
                                                                                             EDs have traditionally accommodated a large number of
S A R S




                    -30
                                                                                             ambulatory care visits that might be handled by a
                                                                                             reformed primary care system, and that when disincentives
                   -40
                                                                                             to visit the ED were introduced, these visit volumes
                                                                     -43.7%                  dropped.
f r o m




                   -50
L e a r n i n g




                  5 In 2001/02 68% of medical admissions and 81% of mental health admissions for GTA and Toronto hospitals entered via the ED.



                  156            .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


8C.2 Surgery Volumes
                                                                  E   X H I B I T                  8 . 8
The hospital survey asked that hospitals report their
surgical volumes (ambulatory procedures, inpatient                Reduction in Ambulatory Procedure Volumes from
elective cases, inpatient non-elective cases) for March,          2002 to 2003 by Month and Hospital Location
April, May, and June of 2002 and 2003. The analyses                        March        April        May         June        Total
presented here compare 2003 volumes with 2002                      10
                                                                                                    3%
volumes for the four months.
                                                                      0
                                                                          -4% -4%                              -1%
Of all Toronto and GTA hospital ambulatory procedure               -10
                                                                                                         -7%         -5%
cases, 98.2% are considered to be elective. When the
                                                                   -20
directives to restrict activity to critically ill patients were                                                            -16%
published, ambulatory procedures and ambulatory clinic                                                                         -23%
                                                                   -30
visits would be the first services to be reduced or elimi-
nated. Exhibit 8.8 shows the reduction in ambulatory              -40
procedure volumes from 2002 to 2003.                              -50

In April 2003, ambulatory procedure volumes dropped by            -60
                                                                                     -56%
56% in the GTA hospitals and by 70% in the Toronto                -70
hospitals, compared to April 2002. In May 2003, GTA                                         -70%
hospital ambulatory procedure volumes rebounded to a              -80
level 3% above the prior year. Toronto hospital ambula-                        GTA Ambulatory Procedure
tory procedure volumes in May were only 7% below the
                                                                               Toronto Ambulatory Procedure
prior year. SARS II appears to have had very limited
impact on ambulatory procedure volumes, with the GTA
hospitals only 1% below, and Toronto hospitals 5% below,
the prior year. The majority of the ambulatory procedure          E   X H I B I T                  8 . 9
backlog was caused in April.
                                                                  Reduction in Inpatient Elective Surgery Volumes from
Exhibit 8.9 shows the impact of the SARS outbreak on              2002 to 2003 by Month and Hospital Location
inpatient elective surgery volumes in the Toronto and                      March        April        May         June        Total
GTA hospitals. In April, the reductions in surgery were            10




                                                                                                                                           C a n a d a
greatest for the Toronto hospitals, but for both the GTA                  0%
and Toronto hospitals, the percent reduction was not as               0
great as it was for ambulatory procedures.                                     -4%
                                                                   -10
                                                                                                   -13%-15%
Although GTA inpatient elective surgery volumes for                -20
                                                                                                               -21%     -18%
May showed a significant increase over April, they stayed




                                                                                                                                           i n
                                                                                                                   -24%     -26%
13% below the level from the previous year. In June, the           -30
drop in volumes for inpatient elective surgery for the


                                                                                                                                           H e a l t h
GTA hospitals was even greater, at 21% below the prior             -40
                                                                                     -37%
year. The Toronto hospitals followed a similar pattern,
                                                                   -50
with inpatient elective surgery volumes 15% below the
prior year in May, and then further below (24%) in June.           -60
                                                                                            -57%
                                                                                                                                           P u b l i c



Thus, during the initial outbreak (in April), the drop in          -70
ambulatory surgery activity was greater than the drop in                       GTA Inpatient Elective
inpatient elective surgery, whereas during May and June,
                                                                               Toronto Inpatient Elective
ambulatory surgery volumes returned almost to normal
while the volume of inpatient elective surgery remained
                                                                                                                                           o f




depressed. One explanation is a lack of critical care
capacity in the hospitals, since complex inpatient elective
                                                                                                                                           R e n e w a l




cases (e.g., most cardiac surgery, most thoracic surgery,
most neurosurgery, etc.) are more likely to require a
critical care stay.

..........................................................................................                                           157
                  .................................................................................................

                  The inpatient non-elective surgery
                  patients would be expected to fall              E   X H I B I T                                                     8 . 1 0
                  into the category of critically ill
                                                                  2003 GTA and Toronto Hospital Bed Occupancy for Medical, Surgical, and Mental
                  patients, who would be given
                                                                  Health Beds by Week
                  priority with little reduction in
                                                                  100%
                  volumes caused by the activity
                  restrictions imposed as a result of              95%
                  SARS. Non-elective surgery
                  volumes for each of the four                     90%
                  months were generally within
                  10% of the previous year’s                       85%

                  volume. For the GTA hospitals,
                                                                   80%
                  non-elective surgery volumes were
                  actually higher than the prior year              75%




                                                                                                            Code Orange Declared
                  for three of the four months (and
                  only 1% lower in May). For the                   70%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SARS Alliance
                  Toronto hospitals, non-elective
                                                                   65%
                  surgery volumes were higher
                  during SARS I, but lower during                  60%
                  SARS II. The higher non-elective
                  surgery volumes could be a result                55%
                  of hospitals re-categorizing
                                                                   50%
                  patients from elective to non-
                                                                          2-Mar-03

                                                                                     9-Mar-03

                                                                                                16-Mar-03

                                                                                                                          23-Mar-03

                                                                                                                                      30-Mar-03

                                                                                                                                                  6-Apr-03

                                                                                                                                                             13-Apr-03

                                                                                                                                                                           20-Apr-03

                                                                                                                                                                                       27-Apr-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                   4-May-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                              11-May-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          18-May-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             25-May-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1-Jun-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8-Jun-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15-Jun-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             22-Jun-03
                  elective, year-over-year growth in
                  volumes, or random variation.
                                                                                                                                                                         Week Beginning
                  8C.3 Patient Days and                                                         Mental Health                                                                          Medical                                                           Surgical
                       Occupancy
                  The OMHLTC provided daily census and bed numbers,                                                                   In early March 2003, surgical bed occupancy was 88%,
                  by bed type, for GTA and Toronto hospitals for March,                                                               with a drop to 80% during the March school break. It
                  April, May, and June of 20036. Exhibit 8.10 shows the                                                               dropped from 85% just prior to the declaration of Code
                  change in occupancy of medical, surgical, and mental health                                                         Orange to 68% immediately following the declaration.
                  beds from the beginning of March to the end of June.                                                                From late April until the end of June, surgical bed
                                                                                                                                      occupancy stayed between 75 and 80%.
                  The vertical bars on Exhibit 8.10 show the date that the
                  Code Orange directive was published and the date that                                                               Occupancy of mental health beds dropped from 80%
                  the SARS Alliance hospitals were assigned.                                                                          prior to SARS I to 62% in mid-April. It rose to 75% by
                                                                                                                                      mid-May and stayed close to 75% until the end of June
                  In early March 2003, medical bed occupancy averaged                                                                 (when it dropped slightly to 73%). The drop in mental
                  95%. High occupancy (over 90%) in medical beds is                                                                   health bed occupancy is surprising since most mental
                  associated with off-service placement of patients and                                                               health admissions (94.5%) are considered non-elective.
                  more frequent transfers of patients between services.                                                               This drop is likely related to the reduction in ED activity,
                  This can present infection control challenges as patients                                                           since most mental health inpatients are admitted via the
S A R S




                  are moved from one unit to another, sometimes                                                                       ED. There was no way, with the available data, to assess
                  temporarily placed on units where the staff may be                                                                  the impact of the reduction of mental health inpatient
                  unfamiliar with their care requirements.                                                                            activity on mental health patients (or potential patients).
f r o m




                  During SARS I, medical bed occupancy dropped to 80%.                                                                The occupancy data show that the introduction of Code
                  It recovered to almost 85% by mid-May, but dropped                                                                  Orange had the most immediate and greatest impact on
                  again to 80% during SARS II.                                                                                        surgical beds. There was also a large occupancy reduction
                                                                                                                                      for mental health beds, particularly in Toronto
L e a r n i n g




                  6 At the time that this report was prepared, not all Toronto and GTA hospitals had reported their occupancy data for June 2003. Only hospitals with
                    complete data for all four months are included in the analyses. Data were missing for June 2003 for four acute care hospitals—Toronto East General,
                    St. Joseph’s Health Centre, Sunnybrook and Women’s, and St. Michael’s Hospital (which was a SARS Alliance hospital).


                  158         .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

community hospitals. The
reduction in occupancy for medical      E   X H I B I T                                                             8 . 1 1
beds was not as rapid or as large.
                                        2003 GTA and Toronto Hospital Overall Acute Care Bed Occupancy by Hospital
                                        SARS Alliance Status by Week
Exhibit 8.11 shows that prior to
                                        100%
the establishment of the SARS
Alliance the hospitals that would
become Alliance members main-
                                         90%
tained overall bed occupancy rates
better than the other hospitals.
We speculate that this is because        80%
two of the hospitals (St. Michael’s
and Sir William Osler) had very
limited SARS volumes in SARS I,          70%




                                                                                    Code Orange Declared
and the Scarborough General site
would have taken on overload




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SARS Alliance
from the closure of the Grace site.      60%
After the Alliance was established,
overall bed occupancy in the
Alliance hospitals dropped to            50%

50%. However, this figure may be
somewhat misleading. A major
                                         40%
contributor to the drop in
                                               2-Mar-03

                                                          9-Mar-03

                                                                     16-Mar-03

                                                                                                        23-Mar-03

                                                                                                                    30-Mar-03

                                                                                                                                6-Apr-03

                                                                                                                                           13-Apr-03

                                                                                                                                                         20-Apr-03

                                                                                                                                                                     27-Apr-03

                                                                                                                                                                                 4-May-03

                                                                                                                                                                                            11-May-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                        18-May-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              25-May-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1-Jun-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8-Jun-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15-Jun-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            22-Jun-03
occupancy in SARS Alliance
hospitals was the virtual closure
of North York General Hospital.                                                                                                                        Week Beginning
Furthermore, data from one of
                                                                                                                                     Non-Aliance                                                           Alliance
the four SARS Alliance hospitals,
St. Michael's Hospital, were not
available for analysis. At the same
time, the non-Alliance hospitals        E   X H I B I T                                                             8 . 1 2
were able to maintain an overall




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C a n a d a
                                        2003 GTA and Toronto Hospital Overall Acute Care Bed Occupancy by Week
occupancy rate of 85% during
                                        100%
SARS II.
                                         95%
Exhibit 8.12 shows that during
SARS II (and after the establish-        90%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        i n
ment of the SARS Alliance) the
                                         85%
overall hospital acute care bed
occupancy was approximately 80%,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        H e a l t h
                                         80%
much lower than the above 90%
rate in early March, but higher          75%
than the 75% rate during SARS I.
                                                                                 Code Orange Declared




                                         70%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SARS Alliance




The attempt to confine the impact of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P u b l i c


                                         65%
SARS to the SARS Alliance hospitals
during SARS II appears to have           60%
insulated the non-Alliance hospitals
from further large reductions in         55%

activity, but the non-Alliance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        o f




                                         50%
hospitals were still unable to return
                                               2-Mar-03

                                                          9-Mar-03

                                                                     16-Mar-03

                                                                                                        23-Mar-03

                                                                                                                    30-Mar-03

                                                                                                                                6-Apr-03

                                                                                                                                           13-Apr-03

                                                                                                                                                         20-Apr-03

                                                                                                                                                                     27-Apr-03

                                                                                                                                                                                 4-May-03

                                                                                                                                                                                            11-May-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                        18-May-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              25-May-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1-Jun-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8-Jun-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15-Jun-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            22-Jun-03




to pre-SARS occupancy levels.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        R e n e w a l




                                                                                                                                                       Week Beginning



..........................................................................................                                                                                                                                                                                  159
                  .................................................................................................


                  8C.4 Elective Surgery Backlog                                                 • orthopaedic surgery ($5.2 million); and

                  As noted, most medical admissions to acute care hospitals                     • cardio-thoracic ($5.2 million).
                  are non-elective and occur via the ED. The majority of
                  surgical admissions are elective (as are almost all ambula-                   The analysis above is based on direct costs only. Some
                  tory procedures). This analysis of the service backlog in                     overhead costs (excluded from the direct cost calculation)
                  Toronto and GTA hospitals accordingly focuses on elective                     could be considered to be partially variable, or at least
                  surgery cases (both ambulatory and inpatient).                                affected by changes in direct care volume (e.g., laundry,
                                                                                                housekeeping, materials management). If 50% of overhead
                  If Toronto and GTA elective surgery activity in March,                        costs were added to recognize variable overhead costs,
                  April, May, and June 2003 had been equal to the activity                      the total estimate of the cost of deferrable surgical activity
                  levels in the same months in 20027, then we estimate                          would increase from $32.1 million to $37.9 million.
                  that there would have been 6,641 additional inpatient                         However, as explained above, it is unlikely that the entire
                  cases and 17,828 additional ambulatory procedure cases.                       calculated backlog will need to be cleared.
                  More than half of the inpatient elective surgery backlog
                  occurred in April 2003, during SARS I and Code Orange.                        While this calculation focuses on deferred elective
                  The ambulatory procedure backlog was even more                                surgical activity, there will be various other backlogs,
                  concentrated, with 85% occurring in April.                                    such as deferred elective medical admissions and deferred
                                                                                                ambulatory diagnostic tests.
                  For purposes of calculating the cost to eliminate this
                  backlog, we have assumed that all of the elective surgical                    The OMHLTC has made $25 million available to hospitals
                  cases that could not be accommodated during the SARS                          for clearing deferred cases arising from the SARS outbreak.
                  outbreak were deferred and will have to be accommo-                           This funding will go some distance towards the estimated
                  dated some time in the future. It may not be necessary                        costs of the backlog, but not cover all estimated costs.
                  to address the entire backlog since:
                                                                                                Funding will not be the only limiting factor on the
                  • some patients may no longer require surgery (having                         capacity of the Toronto and GTA hospitals to further
                    opted for non-surgical treatment instead) or may no                         increase their activity levels to clear the backlogs. Other
                    longer be suitable candidates for the surgery;                              possible constraints include:

                  • some patients may have sought and received their                            • hospital physical capacity (e.g., OR theatres, beds);
                    care in hospitals outside Toronto and the GTA; and
                                                                                                • staffing shortages (e.g., ICU nurses, respiratory
                  • some physicians and patients may reassess the                                 therapists); and
                    appropriateness of the planned surgery (given the
                    restricted access), leading to removal of some patients                     • impact on efficiency and productivity of
                    from the waiting lists.                                                       accommodating the post-SARS “new normal” practice
                                                                                                  in Ontario hospitals.
                  Using the 2001/02 CIHI/Hay Group annual benchmarking
                  study data for Toronto and GTA hospitals, we established                      In addition, if overtime payments are required to ensure
                  clinical program profiles for elective inpatient and                          that staff is available to support the expanded activity,
                  ambulatory procedure activity. By applying average                            the unit costs per case will also be higher.
                  direct cost per weighted case values to the weighted case
                  data, we estimated the direct cost of the deferred surgical                   8D. Recommendations
                  activity to be $32.1 million.
S A R S




                                                                                                A number of the issues raised by these interviews, focus
                  The program areas with the estimated greatest backlog                         groups, surveys, and analyses have already been addressed
                  (in terms of cost) are:                                                       in earlier chapters, viz. strengthening public health
                                                                                                infrastructure, better F/P/T coordination, clarity about
f r o m




                  • general surgery (including much of the cancer surgery,                      outbreak management at a systems level, emergency
                    $6.3 million);                                                              preparedness and response and its relationship to health
L e a r n i n g




                  7 We have assumed that without SARS, the 2003 activity levels would have been equal to the 2002 activity levels. This might not have been the case
                    since some hospitals facing funding constraints may have planned to reduce activity anyway in 2003, while others were planning for increased
                    activity consistent with program expansions arising from Health Service Restructuring Commission directives.



                  160         .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

emergencies, surveillance, systems of alerts, and           8.6 The CEO and relevant clinical chiefs of each
communication challenges. However, additional issues,           hospital or health region should ensure that
many specific to health care and local/regional public          there is continuing education for hospital staff,
health, also emerged. The Committee’s members live,             particularly front-line health care workers, to
work, and pay taxes in several different provinces of           enhance awareness of outbreak/infectious
Canada. Several of us are active as administrators and/or       disease issues and institutional/clinical
practitioners in the health field. As the tenor of the          infection control.
foregoing chapters has illustrated, we see our mandate as
                                                            8.7 Provincial/territorial ministries and departments
national, aiming at building all levels of public health
                                                                of health should ensure that all key health leaders
collaboratively. We therefore have no hesitation in
                                                                are trained in crisis communications. Hospital
offering recommendations that bear on health care and
                                                                and health region CEOs in turn should ensure
local/provincial public health matters. Accordingly, the
                                                                that clinical leaders and key administrators are
Committee recommends that:
                                                                also trained in crisis communications and that
                                                                the organization has a clear cut protocol for
8.1 The CEOs of hospitals and health regions should
                                                                providing all relevant information to staff and
    ensure that there is a formal Regional Infectious
                                                                hearing their concerns in a timely, respectful,
    Disease Network that can design and oversee
                                                                and participatory fashion.
    implementation of hospital strategies for
    responding to outbreaks of infectious disease.          8.8 Provincial/territorial ministries and departments
    These Networks should map out programs of                   of health should require through regulation
    hospital surveillance for infectious diseases that          and provide funding to ensure that emergency
    cross-link institutions and connect in turn to a            departments have the physical facilities to isolate,
    national surveillance program so as to integrate            contain and manage incidents of infectious
    hospital and community-based information.                   disease. Emergency departments should also be
                                                                equipped with appropriate infostructure to
8.2 As part of its activities, the F/P/T Network for
                                                                enable their participation in infectious disease
    Emergency Preparedness and Response should
                                                                surveillance networks, including receipt of all
    examine provincial and federal emergency
                                                                necessary national and international alerts.
    measures with a view to ensuring that all
    emergency plans include a clear hierarchy of            8.9 Provincial/territorial ministries and departments
    response mechanisms ranging from the response               of health should provide the necessary funding
    of a single ministry to a response from the entire          for renovation to achieve minimal facility




                                                                                                                       C a n a d a
    government, with appropriate cross-linkages.                standards for infection control in emergency
                                                                departments.
8.3 Provincial/territorial ministries and departments
    of health should ensure that emergency plans            8.10 Provincial/territorial ministries and departments
    include provisions for appropriate                           of health should ensure that each hospital has
    compensation of those individuals required to                sufficient negative pressure rooms for treat-




                                                                                                                       i n
    respond to and those affected by the emergency.              ment of patients with infectious disease.
8.4 Provincial/territorial ministries and departments       8.11 Provincial/territorial ministries and departments


                                                                                                                       H e a l t h
    of health should revise their statutes and                   of health should ensure that, for emergency
    regulations to require that every hospital or                situations, at least one hospital in each ‘region’
    health region has formalized and updated                     of a province/territory has sufficient facilities
    protocols for outbreak management. These                     and other infrastructure to serve as a regional
    plans must include mechanisms for getting                    centre to anchor the response to outbreaks of
                                                                                                                       P u b l i c


    information and supplies to those outside the                infectious disease.
    institutional sector, such as primary care
                                                            8.12 Provincial/territorial ministries and departments
    physicians, ambulance personnel/paramedics,
                                                                 of health should ensure that systems are devel-
    and community care providers.
                                                                 oped to ensure that providers and the public
8.5 The CEO of each hospital or health region should             receive timely, accurate and consistent infor-
                                                                                                                       o f




    ensure that each hospital’s protocol for outbreak            mation and directives during an outbreak of
    management incorporates an understanding of                  infectious disease.
                                                                                                                       R e n e w a l




    the hospital’s interrelationships with local and
    provincial public health authorities.


..........................................................................................                     161
                  .................................................................................................

                  8.13 Public health managers and facility/regional
                       health authority CEOs, in collaboration with
                       relevant unions, professional associations and
                       individuals, should create a process/mechanism
                       to include front-line public health and health
                       care workers in advance planning to prepare
                       for related outbreaks of infectious diseases and
                       other health emergencies. Occupational
                       health and safety issues should be given
                       prominence in this process.
                  8.14 Provincial/territorial ministries and departments
                       of health should engage the Canadian Council
                       for Health Services Accreditation to work with
                       appropriate stakeholders to strengthen infection
                       control standards, surveyor guidelines and
                       tools that are applicable to emergency services
                       as well as outbreak management within health
                       care institutions. The standards should also
                       include descriptors of the appropriate expertise
                       required to maintain hospital infection control.
S A R S
f r o m
L e a r n i n g




                  162      .........................................................................................
                                SARS and Public Health
Chapter 9


SOME LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES
RAISED BY SARS AND INFECTIOUS DISEASES
IN CANADA
.................................................................................................



The SARS outbreak and its aftermath have raised a number         reporting. Next, we review aspects of existing public
of legal and ethical issues. We begin with legal issues, as      health legislation in three provinces (British Columbia,
these are most germane to the Committee’s mandate. A             Ontario and Quebec) that deal with infectious disease
number of provider groups, such as the Canadian                  outbreaks, and assess this legislation against the benchmark
Healthcare Association, the Canadian Medical Association,        of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s
and the Canadian Pharmacists Association, raised the             [CDC] Model State Emergency Health Powers Act.
need for specific legislative reforms. Indeed, the legal         The last legal area for review is the matter of federal
issues raised by SARS speak to the need for a thorough           emergency legislation. The concluding section of the
review of the broader constitutional and statutory frame-        chapter returns to ethical issues and lessons learned from
work governing infectious disease management in Canada.          the SARS outbreak.
They include, among others: the efficacy of existing
federal and provincial legislation governing responses to
communicable disease outbreaks; the legal relationships
                                                                 9A. General Legislative and
between local and provincial public health officials; the            Governance Issues
constitutionality of mandatory isolation, quarantine, and
treatment orders under both federal and provincial law in        9A.1 Legislation and Regulation as
light of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedom’s                 Components of the National Public




                                                                                                                                C a n a d a
guarantees for physical liberty and procedural fairness;              Health Infrastructure
workplace legislation and regulations as regards rights to
refuse dangerous work and continuation of salary during          In Chapter 4, we outlined the basic components of the
quarantine or isolation; and the legal framework                 public health infrastructure, indicating that an appropriate
governing health information privacy under the Charter,          legislative and regulatory framework was essential to
provincial privacy and health information statutes, and          giving Canada a stronger capacity for coordinating and




                                                                                                                                i n
other legislation governing the health sector. Although          managing a response to outbreaks such as SARS. What
all of these issues require eventual attention, we focus         exist now are separate systems within each of the provinces


                                                                                                                                H e a l t h
here on a narrower set of questions.                             and territories, as well as a federal system that operates
                                                                 primarily at Canada’s international borders. These systems
First, we revisit, following from discussion in Chapters 3       are connected by a limited number of intergovernmental
and 4, some of the legal instruments available for the           agreements, rather than through a systematic set of
creation of a national infrastructure for the detection and      intergovernmental agreements oriented around an agreed
                                                                                                                                P u b l i c



management of infectious disease outbreaks. Second, a            strategic plan or through formal legal instruments that
draft discussion document on federal legislation dealing         enable the systems to operate collectively and detect and
with national health surveillance (the Canada Health             address common challenges.
Protection Act) has recently been circulated. We review
the impact of this proposed legislation, and the impact of       In legal terms, we are speaking of the need for rules of
                                                                                                                                o f




existing federal legislation (the Privacy Act and the Personal   conduct (public health rules) that could guide the
Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act) and         behaviour of all actors in the public health system—
                                                                                                                                R e n e w a l




proposed federal legislation on the creation of a national       health care providers (e.g., physicians, nurses), health
database for infectious disease surveillance and provider        care institutions (e.g., hospitals, laboratories), public



..........................................................................................                              163
                  .................................................................................................

                  health officials from all levels of government (federal,         centripetal forces over many decades. As noted in earlier
                  provincial and local), and private individuals potentially       chapters, the constitutional division of responsibility is
                  subject to quarantine and isolation orders. With respect         not well-aligned with taxation authority in Canada, with
                  to surveillance, examples include rules governing the            the result that successive federal governments have used
                  following: case identification (e.g., uniform criteria for       spending power instead of legislative authority in the
                  diagnosis and laboratory testing), data sharing (e.g., time-     health field.
                  lines and procedures for reporting new cases and norms
                  governing the protection of privacy), and information            Our recommendations thus far have followed this tradition.
                  dissemination (e.g., responsibility for communicating to         In effect, we are recommending that the federal govern-
                  national and international audiences and the content of          ment use grants as incentives for provinces, municipalities
                  such communications). National public health rules are           and health care providers to participate in a national
                  particularly important with respect to surveillance, because     infrastructure and infostructure (e.g., setting data standards
                  they facilitate the development of a real-time picture of        regarding the timeliness and accuracy of information as
                  the spread of infectious diseases at the national level.         conditions, agreeing to interoperability for outbreak surge
                                                                                   capacity, sharing laboratory resources, etc.), without
                  Obviously, a national infrastructure also involves the           seeking to establish its jurisdiction over public health
                  creation of new federal and F/P/T public health institutions.    aspects of infectious disease management. This new flow
                  These have already been outlined in previous chapters.           of funds would be accompanied by structures to facilitate
                  In each case, considerable effort is needed to determine         the attainment of F/P/T consensus and the creation of
                  how these institutions will operate, and we have assumed         multiple intergovernmental agreements on the parameters
                  in our budgetary thinking that this in itself will be a          of a renewed and seamless public health infrastructure.
                  non-trivial albeit time-limited cost.                            However, the Committee sees a continuing issue of
                                                                                   governance and legislative authority that requires
                  We reviewed in Chapter 4 the role of three policy instru-        medium-term consideration.
                  ments that operate on an interleaved basis—grants,
                  contracts, and intergovernmental agreements.                     9A.2 Governance Aspects
                  Given the critical nature of public health, and the need
                  for genuine consistency and clarity about who does               In theory, public health norms could be set by the federal
                  what, the Committee necessarily returns here to a fourth         government or by the new agency acting on the authority
                  key policy instrument—legislation and regulation.                of Parliament. The legislation establishing the agency
                                                                                   could set out a comprehensive set of public health
                  Again in simplified legal terms, the federal Parliament or       norms, and/or delegate the enactment of public health
                  a provincial legislature may (a) enact rules, or (b) delegate    norms to the Cabinet, the Minister of Health, or the new
                  the power to make rules either to entities that are part of      Canadian Agency for Public Health. The act would
                  government (e.g., Cabinet, ministers of health) or arm’s         prevail over conflicting provincial public health legislation,
                  length from government (e.g., the Canadian Agency for            unless challenged in the courts and struck down as
                  Public Health, or the F/P/T Network for Communicable             unconstitutional.
                  Disease Control). Rules enacted by legislatures take the
                  form of legislation, whereas rules enacted by an authority       An existing model for such an approach is the proposed
                  exercising delegated powers take the form of regulations,        Assisted Human Reproduction Act, Bill C-13. Bill C-13
                  by-laws, orders-in-council, etc. As an example, legislation      would criminalize certain conduct (e.g., human cloning).
                  could set out processes and authority for establishing a         It also would permit certain “controlled activities” (e.g.,
                  list of reportable and notifiable diseases, and regulations or   handling of sperm) to be performed only by licensed
                  by-laws could specify the current list of relevant diseases.     individuals, and/or at licensed facilities, in accordance
S A R S




                                                                                   with terms spelled out in regulations. The regulations
                  The advantage of legislation is that it governs the conduct      would lay down how “controlled activities” could take
                  of public officials and private institutions and individuals     place, effectively regulating the work of health profes-
                  with or without their consent. But the limitation of             sionals in connection with assisted human reproduction.
f r o m




                  legislation is first, that a legislature can only enact legis-   Bill C-13 would also require licensees to report certain
                  lation in areas where it has jurisdiction, and second, that      health information to a new federal agency, the Assisted
                  legislation represents a visible use of power by government      Human Reproduction Agency of Canada, which would
                  with attendant political costs—particularly in a federation      maintain a personal health information registry that
L e a r n i n g




                  such as Canada where there have been tensions and                could be used to administer and enforce the Act. Although




                  164       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

there is provision in this scheme for provincial input,         norms in federal, provincial and territorial legislation.
and for enforcement to be delegated to the provinces, the       In turn, that process could lead to legislative renewal
Agency would clearly be a federal agency.                       and harmonization.

A federal model would be the most efficient way to achieve      All these initiatives assume that provincial legislation
national uniformity in national public health rules, but        would remain in place, and would be modified as neces-
has drawbacks that we have already indicated. Unless its        sary to comply with either federal conditions or, ideally,
terms were closely aligned to the collaborative mecha-          an emerging F/P/T consensus. They assume that neither
nisms set out elsewhere in this report, and unless it carried   Health Canada nor the new Canadian federal agency has
with it a funding mechanism, a federal model would run          legal authority to regulate provincial, territorial and local
the risk of imposing unfunded federal mandates, and             public health responses. And they assume, most impor-
spark substantial opposition from provinces. From a policy      tantly, that SARS has brought all F/P/T governments to a
standpoint, federal uniformity may come at the expense          unanimous view that public health matters should be
of provincial innovation and experimentation. The               separated from other jurisdictional tensions, and regulated
measures already set out in the Committee’s report should       cooperatively.
allow the federal government and its provincial/territorial
partners to stitch together existing uncoordinated local,       The Committee accepts that all of these endeavours
provincial and federal public health systems into a national    could be undermined if provinces and territories refuse to
system, with attendant harmonization of existing provincial     participate collaboratively. Hard decisions must be taken
and local public health rules. A federally-imposed system       in the early days of the network, for example, as to
might instead be viewed as a necessary last resort if           whether the majority rules or whether a new norm must
collaborative and consensus-building mechanisms fail.           be adopted unanimously. As described in Chapter 5, an
                                                                F/P/T process has been underway with respect to disease
An alternative approach to creating system norms and            surveillance for many years, and has made only limited
rules would be for all levels of government to delegate         progress on a range of important issues. Accordingly,
powers to some new steering group. In this instance,            one might ask: What is the fall-back position if these
public health norms could be set either by federal,             new investments fail to secure progress?
provincial and territorial governments acting collectively,
or by the new Canadian Agency for Public Health.                In this regard, an obvious option is ‘federal default’.
Local public health authorities would remain in place           “Default” public health norms would be set by the
to implement national public health norms. A weak               federal government, with advice from the new agency.
scheme of F/P/T cooperation to these ends is in place at        Provincial rules would apply if they were “substantially




                                                                                                                                C a n a d a
present, but it is largely informal.                            similar” or “equivalent” to the national public health
                                                                norms, thereby permitting provincial innovation and
How could this scheme be effected? As indicated in              experimentation while ensuring national standards. The
Chapter 4, the new agency would fund and facilitate             federal legislation would presumably include a list of
the implementation of nationally-consistent norms as            notifiable diseases and terms for information sharing that




                                                                                                                                i n
part of the implementation of various initiatives through       would allow the federal government to meet its national
the Public Health Partnerships Program. New funds for           as well as international obligations. Local public health
the National Immunization Strategy could flow to the            authorities would remain in place to implement the


                                                                                                                                H e a l t h
same effect.                                                    national norms. Examples of federal legislation that set
                                                                out a federal default position that does not apply in
The F/P/T Network for Communicable Disease Control              provinces with equivalent or substantially similar schemes
provides another vehicle, one with joint governance to          include the Tobacco Act, the proposed Assisted Human
facilitate urgent consensus-building in the realm of            Reproduction Act, the Personal Information Protection and
                                                                                                                                P u b l i c



disease surveillance and outbreak management, where             Electronic Documents Act, and the Canadian Environmental
front line and provincial capacity is essential. It is          Protection Act. The effect of this model is to permit
theoretically possible but unlikely, that federal, provincial   provincial statutes to prevail over federal law in the event
and territorial lawmakers would delegate powers to the          of overlap—a reversal of the norm whereby federal law
network, which could then regulate both provincial and          prevails over provincial law in areas of overlapping
                                                                                                                                o f




local public health responses. On the other hand, since         jurisdiction. The courts have not considered the
the governance structure for the new network is based on        constitutionality of these provisions.
                                                                                                                                R e n e w a l




F/P/T co-decision, our expectation is that the network
will facilitate a process of harmonization of public health


..........................................................................................                              165
                  .................................................................................................

                  Federal default legislation charts a middle path that both      committal), the medical profession (including the practice
                  ensures the creation of a national minimum and permits          of medicine), workplace health and safety, the regulation
                  provincial variation. However, because the federal              of foods for health reasons, the safety and security of
                  legislation would impose legal obligations on provincial        patients, and hospitals. The Supreme Court has stated
                  and local public health officials, this strategy would still    that provinces enjoy jurisdiction over “health care in the
                  engender provincial/territorial opposition unless sufficient    province generally, including matters of cost and efficiency,
                  progress was made through the new funding mechanisms,           the nature of the health care delivery system, and priva-
                  strategies, and networks to permit the emergence of a           tization of the provision of medical services,” as well as
                  consensus on ‘template’ provincial legislation and associated   “hospital insurance and medicare programs.”
                  federal responsibilities that would be encompassed in the
                  federal default provisions. On the other hand, if               These areas of provincial jurisdiction are well-established.
                  insufficient progress is made despite the investment of         The central basis of provincial jurisdiction is the provincial
                  hundreds of millions of dollars, we believe Canadians           power to regulate “property and civil rights”. This power
                  would expect the federal government to get on with the          has been interpreted very broadly by the courts to
                  task of creating a clearer framework for its own role and       encompass rights that individuals possess under the
                  the corresponding default legislation for F/P/T interactions.   common law of tort (e.g., the right to bodily integrity,
                                                                                  which is at issue in medical negligence, assault, and
                  In all of this discussion, the question remains: Setting        battery), contract, and property. Any public health law
                  aside the various political and practical issues that have      that infringes upon these common law rights falls within
                  been given point above, does the federal government             provincial jurisdiction.
                  have a constitutional basis for legislating in the public
                  health sphere?                                                  Despite the broad powers of the provinces to regulate
                                                                                  public health, federal involvement has also been clearly
                                                                                  sanctioned by the courts. Indeed, the Supreme Court has
                  9B. Jurisdictional Issues                                       said that “subjects related to ‘health’ do not exclusively
                                                                                  come within either federal or provincial competence,”
                  9B.1 Background
                                                                                  and that “Parliament and the provincial legislatures may
                  As noted in Chapter 3, the Canadian Constitution’s few          both validly legislate” with respect to health.
                  explicit references to health-related matters grant both
                  levels of government jurisdiction. The Constitution             The firmest basis of federal jurisdiction over the manage-
                  confers jurisdiction over “hospitals” and “asylums” on          ment of infectious disease outbreaks is the federal power
                  provinces, and jurisdiction over “quarantine” and “marine       over “Criminal Law” although a good argument for
                  hospitals” on the federal government. Since the goal of         federal jurisdiction can also be made on the basis of the
                  the drafters of the Constitution in 1867 was to create two      federal power to legislate for the “Peace, Order, and Good
                  levels of government with non-overlapping areas of              Government” of Canada (the POGG power). To many,
                  jurisdiction, these provisions can be interpreted as dividing   criminal law instruments—consisting traditionally of a
                  jurisdiction over public health, with the provinces             criminal prohibition, police enforcement, prosecutions
                  governing local public health matters, and the federal          before the courts, and criminal sanctions—would appear
                  government attending to public health risks that arise at       to be unsuitable for the information-gathering and
                  Canada’s international borders (hence the references to         treatment goals that would underlie a national infra-
                  quarantine and marine hospitals).                               structure for infectious disease surveillance. This harkens
                                                                                  back to the eighteenth century concept of public health
                  Over time, court decisions have placed many aspects of          practitioners as the ‘medical police’, introduced in
                  health care regulation within provincial jurisdiction. The      Chapter 3! The POGG power, which has been interpreted
S A R S




                  courts have held that provinces possess jurisdiction over       to permit the federal government to address issues with
                  public health, including legislation for the prevention of      “national dimensions”, appears to be a more appropriate
                  the spread of communicable diseases, and sanitation.            vehicle for federal involvement. However, the impor-
                  The provinces have exercised this jurisdiction to engage        tance of the criminal law power relative to federal juris-
f r o m




                  in health surveillance (including reporting and tracking),      diction is a function of Canada’s constitutional history.
                  outbreak investigations, quarantine, isolation, and
                  mandatory treatment. Moreover, the courts have granted
                  provinces jurisdiction over a variety of related areas: drug
L e a r n i n g




                  addiction (including legislation for involuntary treatment),
                  mental health (including legislation for involuntary



                  166       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


9B.2 Public Health and the Criminal                               However, the Supreme Court has recently upheld under
                                                                  the criminal law power statutes that tie criminal prohibi-
     Law Power
                                                                  tions to extensive regulatory regimes, in the firearms and
Although the Constitution assigns the federal government          environmental protection contexts. These schemes are a
broad powers, such as the POGG power and the power to             far cry from the traditional model of criminal law, and may
regulate “trade and commerce”, most of these powers               be designed to pre-empt the need for criminal prosecutions.
were historically interpreted extremely narrowly by the           An example of a criminal law statute regulating health
courts. By contrast, the federal criminal law power has           care that contains an extensive regulatory regime is Bill
been interpreted very broadly, and as a direct consequence,       C-13, the proposed Assisted Human Reproduction Act
became the constitutional basis for a wide variety of             (discussed in more detail above).
federal legislation. Thus, the federal criminal law power
is the constitutional basis for a wide range of statutes          Public health legislation, of course, has different goals
outside the traditional criminal law context, including           than the traditional concerns of the criminal law.
the former Combines Investigation Act, the Competition Act,       However, to be a criminal law, a law must be enacted for
the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, and health             one of the following reasons: “public peace, order,
legislation such as the Food and Drugs Act, the Hazardous         security, health or morality.” Public health laws are
Products Act, the Tobacco Act, and Bill C-13, the proposed        clearly enacted for a “health” purpose. Moreover, the
Assisted Human Reproduction Act. The response of the              Supreme Court has recently loosened up the test even
Supreme Court to the federal government’s extensive use           further, now only requiring the law to have been enacted
of the criminal law power has been in many cases to               to further “fundamental values”, a standard that a public
extend its scope even further.                                    health law would no doubt meet.

The focus of previous applications of the federal criminal        A potential advantage of predicating federal legislation
law power to health-related issues has been on products           on the criminal law power is that strictly intra-provincial
that pose a risk to human health. However, through the            activity may be regulated. In contrast, the national
criminal law power, Parliament has already regulated              dimensions branch of the POGG power (discussed below)
threats to human health posed by other individuals (e.g.,         enables federal legislation to regulate interprovincial
the Criminal Code prohibitions on assault and murder).            activity. The leading example here is the Criminal Code
By analogy, Parliament might govern individuals who               itself, which of course governs crime within any single
jeopardize human well-being because they have                     province. The Food and Drugs Act and Bill C-13 also
contracted an infectious disease.                                 prohibit intra-provincial activity.




                                                                                                                                C a n a d a
The Supreme Court has stated that “[t]he scope of the             On the other hand, courts reviewing federal legislation
federal power to create criminal legislation with respect to      will examine if it is a disguised attempt by the federal
health matters is broad,” and has laid down a three-part          government to regulate areas of provincial jurisdiction
test for determining whether a federal law falls within           (e.g., the practice of medicine). Thus, the legislation
the scope of the federal criminal law power: (a) Does the         would need to be crafted with a view to avoiding those
law prohibit an activity? (b) Are there penal consequences




                                                                                                                                i n
                                                                  areas where the federal government has no claim to
for contravening that prohibition? and (c) Is the prohibi-        concurrent jurisdiction.
tion motivated by a criminal law purpose?


                                                                                                                                H e a l t h
                                                                  9B.3 Public Health and the POGG Power
Put another way, from a public policy standpoint, the
principal limitation of the criminal law power is that it         Two branches of the federal government’s Peace, Order
requires the creation of criminal offences. Criminal law          and Good Government [POGG] power are relevant to
offences are usually part of the traditional model of             public health and infectious diseases: (a) the “emergency”
                                                                                                                                P u b l i c



criminal law regulation, which consists of (a) prohibited         branch, which gives the federal Parliament jurisdiction
conduct that is (b) clearly stated in statute, and (c) enforced   to enact laws that would normally lie in provincial
through ex post criminal prosecutions, (d) before the             jurisdiction, on a temporary basis, in times of national
criminal courts. This model is unsuitable for public              crisis; and (b) the “national dimensions” branch, which
health laws.                                                      gives the federal Parliament jurisdiction to enact laws in
                                                                                                                                o f




                                                                  areas of concern to Canada as a whole.
                                                                                                                                R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                              167
                  .................................................................................................

                  The emergency branch of the POGG power sets aside the              Collective action situations arise where (a) public policy
                  division of powers during emergencies, conferring                  problems straddle the divide between federal and provincial
                  “command-and-control” authority on the federal govern-             jurisdiction, and require a coordinated federal-provincial
                  ment. It is applicable to public health, since the courts          response, and (b) the cooperative scheme would be
                  have referred to epidemics and pestilence as health-related        ineffective in every part of the country if one province
                  situations in which it could be invoked, but the threshold         were to decline to participate. Arguably, the ongoing
                  is very high, and therefore it has no applicability in most        failure of the federal government and the provinces to
                  situations. More critically, the emergency branch of the           agree on a system of national surveillance (discussed in
                  POGG power can only be exercised for the duration of               Chapter 5) is an example of just such a federal-provincial
                  the emergency. Thus, the emergency branch of the                   collective action problem.
                  POGG power could not serve as the constitutional basis
                  of mandatory reporting for a national surveillance system          The key limitation of the national dimensions branch of
                  and other components of a national public health                   the POGG power is the need for the area to be regulated
                  infrastructure.                                                    to be relatively narrow and confined, so as to not intrude
                                                                                     too severely on provincial jurisdiction. This raises signifi-
                  The national dimensions branch of the POGG power has               cant design issues for national public health legislation.
                  intuitive appeal. It is what, in non-legal terms, most
                  informants have invoked when speaking to the Committee             9B.4 The International Imperative
                  of the legislative imperative facing Canada in the public
                  health sphere. This branch of the POGG power has been              SARS has driven home the international dimension of
                  used very infrequently by courts to uphold federal                 infectious disease control and, in the view of the
                  legislation, but holds potential as the basis for renewing         Committee’s legal consultant, strengthens the constitu-
                  federal public health regulation, particularly with respect        tional case for a federal public health law under the
                  to infectious disease management. The test for the                 national dimensions branch of POGG: the Supreme
                  national dimensions branch is (a) the area to be regulated         Court has held that where an international treaty
                  must have a singleness, distinctiveness and indivisibility         stipulates that a policy matter straddles the divide
                  that clearly distinguishes it from matters of provincial           between provincial and federal jurisdiction, the case for
                  concern; and (b) the area to be regulated must have a              federal jurisdiction is much stronger. At present, inter-
                  scale of impact on provincial jurisdiction that is                 national public health treaties that address infectious
                  reconcilable with the division of powers.                          disease management are narrow in scope. The World
                                                                                     Health Organization’s [WHO] International Health
                  The courts have articulated a number of principles in              Regulations impose a range of binding legal obligations
                  interpreting the national dimensions branch of the POGG            on WHO member states to stem the international spread
                  power that bear on potential public health legislation.            of infectious disease.
                  The Supreme Court has invoked the idea of “provincial
                  inability” that, taken literally, suggests that the POGG           These International Health Regulations were under
                  power permits the federal government to act where the              revision prior to SARS, and are being reviewed again in
                  provinces cannot. But the better view is that the POGG             light of this outbreak. Draft proposals have not been
                  power permits the federal government to act alone in               released yet to the public. However, a WHO discussion
                  areas where provinces could conceivably legislate but are          document suggests that the revised International Health
                  unwilling to do so. Two such situations are (a) inter-             Regulations require member states to operate a national
                  jurisdictional spillovers, and (b) federal-provincial collective   surveillance system:
                  action problems. Each of these potentially applies to
                  infectious disease surveillance and outbreak management.               Rapid identification of urgent national risks that
S A R S




                  A spillover is a situation where a province’s failure to               may be public health emergencies of international
                  adequately regulate an activity has negative effects in                concern would require that each country have a
                  other provinces, in federal territories, or in other countries.        national surveillance system that feeds data from
                  According to the Supreme Court, the federal Parliament                 the periphery to the central governments in a very
f r o m




                  can legislate if “provincial failure to deal effectively with          short time. … Further, the system should be able to
                  the intra-provincial aspects of the matter could have an               analyse such data rapidly and facilitate quick
                  adverse effect on extra-provincial interests” (italics added).         decisions.
                  This requires little explanation in the context of SARS.
L e a r n i n g




                  168        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

WHO’s emphasis on the importance of accurate and                 9B.5 Other Bases for Federal Legislation
comprehensive national data, collected on a real-time
basis without regard to provincial boundaries, would             The federal government enjoys jurisdiction over
serve to strengthen the claim of federal jurisdiction in         “Quarantine and the Establishment and Maintenance of
Canada. Moreover, in another document, WHO proposes              Marine Hospitals.” This power is the constitutional basis
that the revised International Health Regulations lay            of the federal Quarantine Act. The scope of the power is
down the following “minimum core requirements” for               unclear, as it has not been the subject of constitutional
national surveillance systems. Timely, accurate and              litigation. Originally, it was thought to be limited to
complete data are of central importance:                         maritime quarantine, given the juxtaposition of
                                                                 “quarantine” and “marine hospitals”. Although the
Detection and reporting: Unusual and/or unexpected               means for international travel have expanded, it is still
disease events or public health risks in all communities         thought to be confined to quarantine at entry into and
shall be detected and all available essential information        exit from Canada. New regulations under the Quarantine
shall be immediately reported to the appropriate public          Act have already been issued in response to SARS (see also
health response level (e.g., emergency room, village             Chapter 11). Whether this Act could be extended on the
health care worker, etc.).                                       basis of interprovincial travel is unknown.

Response - the first public health response level:               The final basis for federal jurisdiction over public health is
The first level shall have the capacity to verify the reported   its power to regulate trade and commerce. This provision
event or risk and to begin implementing preliminary              gives the federal government the power to regulate inter-
control measures immediately. Each event or risk shall           provincial and international economic activity, up to and
be assessed immediately and if found urgent all available        including the prohibition of interprovincial trade. Subject
and essential information shall be immediately reported          to the Charter, this might permit the federal government
to the designated national focal point.                          to ban the importation of items that carry infectious
                                                                 diseases (if diseases were carried by animals or produce,
Response - national/international level: All reports             for example).
of urgent events or risks shall be assessed at the national
level within 24 hours. If the event/risk is assessed as          9B.6 The US Analogue
meeting any of the following parameters for public health
                                                                 The Committee asked the CDC to advise on whether it
emergencies of international concern, WHO must be
                                                                 had jurisdictional power to investigate an outbreak on its
notified immediately through the national focal point:
                                                                 own cognizance, or whether CDC involvement occurs




                                                                                                                                  C a n a d a
                                                                 secondary to a request for assistance by a state or territory.
• A serious and unusual or unexpected event.
                                                                 We also asked what powers the US federal government
• A significant risk of international spread.                    has to become involved on its own cognizance, absent an
                                                                 invitation from the affected state or states. The CDC
• A significant risk of international travel and/or traffic
                                                                 responded as follows:
  restrictions on the free movement of persons,




                                                                                                                                  i n
  conveyances or trade goods.
                                                                 “As a matter of policy, CDC generally requests state health
                                                                 department authorization to conduct activities within
WHO also stipulates that an additional design feature of


                                                                                                                                  H e a l t h
                                                                 their borders. CDC requests this authorization whether
national health surveillance systems should be a “single
                                                                 the activity involves one state or several, whether CDC
contact point” in a national health surveillance system to
                                                                 staff presence is actual or ‘virtual’, and whether the
communicate information to WHO on a 24/7 basis. This
                                                                 invitation to participate comes from within the state or
international reporting structure would only reinforce
                                                                 from an outside agency or organization. This policy is
the need for a national infrastructure in which all
                                                                                                                                  P u b l i c


                                                                 based upon the Constitutional relationship between the
information is collected at a single point. Again, this
                                                                 federal and state governments. While states are reserved
supports the case for federal jurisdiction.
                                                                 the ‘police powers,’ i.e., the authority of all state govern-
                                                                 ments to enact laws and promote regulations to safeguard
                                                                 the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens within its
                                                                                                                                  o f




                                                                 borders, the federal government retains authority to
                                                                 regulate matters of interstate commerce.”1
                                                                                                                                  R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                                169
                  .................................................................................................


                  9B.7 Federal Legislation as Default                            Second, and as a corollary, we do not believe that the
                                                                                 federal government could commandeer provincial and
                  The early passage of a federal law that imposed unfunded       municipal public health officials to administer a federal
                  obligations on the provinces and territories, or swept aside   public health statute. Politically, the concept of comman-
                  provincial authority over public health matters, would run     deering provincial and local public health officials to
                  counter to the collaborative framework that underpins          deliver federally-framed public policy without their consent
                  our recommendations. The Committee’s optimistic view           strikes at the very idea of federalism. Federal laws do
                  is that if health surveillance and outbreak management         confer on provincial officials’ broad grants of discretion,
                  were left to health professionals working in Health Canada     and/or grants of discretion subject to express criteria, and
                  and the provincial/territorial ministries of health, agree-    the Supreme Court has upheld federal laws employing
                  ment would be reasonably rapid and comprehensive.              both approaches. Here, however, we are considering a
                  Such issues can and should be insulated from the ebb           federal public health statute that would impose duties
                  and flow of F/P/T relations through the creation of the        on provincial and local public health officials (e.g., a
                  Canadian Agency for Public Health and the F/P/T                duty to share disease surveillance information with their
                  Network for Communicable Disease Control.                      counterparts in other provinces and with federal
                                                                                 officials). The most obvious example of a federal statute
                  The need for federal legislation could be vitiated not only    imposing duties on provincial officials is the Criminal
                  by the piecemeal assembly of a system of national rules        Code, which imposes an enormous number of such duties
                  through mechanisms described, but by intergovernmental         on provincial officials, ranging from the police and
                  initiatives to upgrade and harmonize legislation. To that      Crown Attorneys all the way up to provincial Attorneys
                  end, we believe the federal government should embark           General. Precedents for federal regulation imposing
                  on a time-limited intergovernmental initiative with a          duties on provincial officials also exist outside the
                  view to renewal of the legislative framework for disease       Criminal Code. In past provincial challenges to the
                  surveillance and outbreak management in Canada,                constitutionality of federal laws, the imposition of duties
                  ideally extending to broader health emergencies from the       on provincial officials was not itself an issue. Thus, this
                  latter as a starting point.                                    issue has not been squarely addressed by the Supreme
                                                                                 Court. The overwhelming majority of arrangements for
                  Only if these initiatives fail to produce a national system    co-administration or co-management, however, have
                  of public health norms and rules would we recommend            been established on a consensual basis, on the ground
                  that the federal government move towards legislation           that provincial governments are not subordinate to the
                  along the lines of the ‘federal default’ provision set out     federal government.
                  above. Our assumption is that many provinces will be in
                  agreement with the thrust of these legislative reforms
                  and the goal of creating a national system, and that the       9C. Existing and Proposed
                  default legislation would therefore apply only to those            Federal Legislation
                  provinces that have not undertaken the necessary
                  modernization and harmonization.                               9C.1 The Proposed Canada Health
                                                                                      Protection Act
                  Our hesitation arises not just from a deep-seated (and
                  perhaps naïve) belief in collaborative fiscal federalism,      Health Canada recently released proposals for a new
                  but also from two other observations.                          Canada Health Protection Act. Health protection is
                                                                                 currently governed by eleven federal statutes. Health
                  First, outbreaks are fought at the local level. SARS was       Canada has deemed the existing scheme unsatisfactory
                  not contained by Health Canada; it was contained by            on several grounds. The process of legislative revision
S A R S




                  local public health agencies and health care institutions.     has been underway since 1998. Public consultations will
                  With our vast geography and cultural heterogeneity,            commence this Fall, ending at the earliest in December
                  Canada cannot be managed as regards infectious diseases        2003, and may potentially extend until March 2004.
                  like Hong Kong or Singapore.                                   Based on these consultations, Health Canada will draft
f r o m




                                                                                 legislation that will be ready for public distribution in
                  Thus, a federal law may be ineffective if general and          2005, at which point it would proceed through the
                  more harmful than helpful if unduly prescriptive.              legislative process.
L e a r n i n g




                  170       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

The goal of the revision is to repeal and replace four       federal-provincial agreements. These agreements would
statutes—the Food and Drugs Act, the Hazardous Products      be formal documents spelling out the terms of cooperation,
Act, the Quarantine Act, and the Radiation Emitting          which would be accessible to the public, and whose
Devices Act—with a single statute, the Canada Health         contents could be prescribed by legislation.
Protection Act.
                                                             The measures suggested in the proposed Canada Health
The discussion document sets out procedures to deal with     Protection Act to both formalize and make more trans-
communicable diseases in relation to persons entering and    parent the intergovernmental approach to national
exiting Canada, as well as relevant safeguards to ensure     surveillance are commendable. In particular, the provision
compliance with the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.          for enforcement agreements between the federal and
Given the federal government’s constitutional authority      provincial governments would be a positive development.
over interprovincial travel, the discussion document         They are consistent with, and provide legal authority for,
suggests that the provisions governing quarantine would      mechanisms such as those recommended in this report.
also be applicable to movement across provincial and         Unfortunately, the document makes reference to neither
territorial boundaries in Canada, albeit with some modifi-   an agency nor a network of the type proposed in
cations. However, the document does not advance any          Chapters 4 and 5. At the very least, the agency option
further claims to federal jurisdiction on this basis.        might be given prominence for reasons already outlined.

The discussion document also suggests that the Canada        9C.2 Federal Privacy Legislation and
Health Protection Act “could articulate a role for the            Public Health
federal government to work with other public authorities
inside and outside Canada to ensure a national framework     Any national system of health surveillance would entail
for coordinated public health-related surveillance.” More    the collection of vast amounts of personal health
specifically, Health Canada could, “in cooperation with      information. As a consequence, it would potentially
other interested parties,” create a national health          trigger the operation of privacy legislation governing
surveillance system. Health surveillance and research        both the private and public sectors.
activities would include:
                                                             PIPEDA: The Personal Information Privacy and
• developing, supporting and participating in national       Electronic Documents Act (PIPEDA) is a new law that
  and international networks;                                regulates the collection, use and disclosure of “personal
                                                             information” by a range of non-governmental entities,
• promoting the use of standard techniques, analytical
                                                             including corporations, associations, partnerships, trade




                                                                                                                             C a n a d a
  tools, models, definitions and protocols;
                                                             unions, and private individuals. It is not clear where and
• ensuring surveillance of health events which include       how PIPEDA applies to health care providers. To the extent
  several jurisdictions;                                     that PIPEDA does apply, provisions in the law appear
                                                             designed to safeguard provider reporting obligations
• initiating programs to respond to emerging or priority
                                                             under federal and provincial law. However, PIPEDA may
  issues;
                                                             still impede surveillance because of its tight restrictions




                                                                                                                             i n
• establishing, maintaining and operating information        on the non-consensual collection of information. We
  exchange systems; and                                      elaborate below.


                                                                                                                             H e a l t h
• undertaking national surveys.
                                                             PIPEDA began to come into force on January 1, 2001,
                                                             and currently only applies to the federally-regulated
The Act would authorize the Minister of Health to enter
                                                             private sector (airlines, banking, broadcasting, etc.), as
into agreements with provinces regarding these matters,
                                                             well as to interprovincial information transfers (e.g.,
                                                                                                                             P u b l i c


including agreements regarding the delegation of
                                                             communication of personal health information to private
enforcement powers to provincial officials.
                                                             insurers from providers) and international information
                                                             transfers. But it will apply to all entities that fall within
Thus, the discussion document leaves intra-provincial
                                                             its scope on January 1, 2004.
public health regulation to existing provincial public
health systems. The creation of a national infrastructure
                                                                                                                             o f




would be on a negotiated and cooperative basis, with
intergovernmental relationships being governed by
                                                                                                                             R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                           171
                  .................................................................................................

                  The basic rule of PIPEDA is the need for an individual to    public health field. Major stakeholders have called for
                  consent to the collection, use, and disclosure of her/his    legislation that would apply to the health sector instead
                  personal information. The principal target of PIPEDA is      of PIPEDA, or regulations to PIPEDA to clarify its appli-
                  private enterprise. However, PIPEDA has generated            cation to the health sector. These concerns are urgent,
                  controversy in the health sector because its definition of   because the Act will soon be fully in force.
                  personal information includes “personal health infor-
                  mation”, which it defines as follows:                        To these concerns we add the fact that PIPEDA may impede
                                                                               provider reporting in a system of infectious disease
                  (a) information concerning the physical or mental            surveillance. These obstacles could arise not only with
                      health of the individual;                                respect to any new reporting obligations imposed by
                                                                               federal legislation, but also in connection with existing
                  (b) information concerning any health service provided
                                                                               reporting obligations under provincial legislation.
                      to the individual;
                  (c) information concerning the donation by the               A fuller treatment of these issues can be found in the
                      individual of any body part or any bodily substance      report prepared for the Committee by Prof. Choudhry.
                      of the individual or information derived from the        Three points suffice here. First, providers may be partly
                      testing or examination of a body part or bodily          insulated by the fact that PIPEDA focuses on commercial
                      substance of the individual;                             activity, and the information at issue must be collected,
                                                                               used, or disclosed “in the course of” such activity.
                  (d) information that is collected in the course of
                                                                               However, non-profit providers that enter into commercial
                      providing health services to the individual; or
                                                                               contracts involving the transfer of personal health infor-
                  (e) information that is collected incidentally to the        mation (e.g., hospitals contracting with investor-owned
                      provision of health services to the individual.          laboratories and pharmacies) might trigger the operation
                                                                               of PIPEDA with respect to those relationships. Second,
                  This extremely broad definition of health information        it appears that the form of the consent required under
                  covers any health information about an individual,           PIPEDA may vary, with sensitive information requiring
                  however that information is acquired. Other information      express consent. PIPEDA specifically refers to “medical
                  acquired incidentally in the provision of health services—   records” as sensitive information. Third, PIPEDA does
                  e.g., an individual’s name, address, or health card          allow for non-consensual disclosure if the disclosure is
                  number—would also be covered.                                requested “for the purposes of enforcing any law of
                                                                               Canada, a province or a foreign jurisdiction” or “for the
                  If PIPEDA applies to the non-profit health sector, it        purpose of administering any law of Canada or a province.”
                  potentially places into question the legality of a wide      These exceptions would likely extend to reporting
                  variety of existing or potential information-sharing         requirements under provincial or federal public health
                  practices. The Canadian Healthcare Association, for          legislation provided those laws impose a reporting
                  example, has argued that it might make difficult the         obligation. Non-consensual disclosure is also permitted
                  measuring of outcomes and quality of care. The Canadian      “because of an emergency that threatens the life, health
                  Pharmacists Association has suggested that PIPEDA could      or security of an individual.” This could apply to
                  impede providers from submitting insurance claims on         infectious disease reporting in an outbreak, but not in
                  behalf of patients. Stakeholders have also suggested that    ordinary disease surveillance.
                  the consent requirement could impede communication
                  between members of a health care team treating a patient     If a reporting obligation under existing provincial law
                  (Canadian Medical Association) or among different            conflicts with PIPEDA, PIPEDA would prevail. A province
                  providers (Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term          cannot “opt out” of PIPEDA unless the federal government
S A R S




                  Care). The Canadian Institutes of Health Research has        concludes that it has enacted legislation that is “substan-
                  raised concerns that certain of PIPEDA’s provisions would    tially similar” to PIPEDA. Because PIPEDA is not yet fully
                  impose too onerous a burden on researchers.                  in force in the provinces, the question of how the federal
                                                                               government will approach the issue of whether provincial
f r o m




                  These concerns suggest that PIPEDA was not drafted with      laws are substantially similar has not yet been considered.
                  sufficient attention to the particular issues facing the     However, the Privacy Commissioner has interpreted
                  health sector. The Government of Canada has not clearly      “substantially similar” to mean that provincial legislation
                  addressed these concerns in recent months—a situation        must provide protection for privacy that is “equal or
L e a r n i n g




                  that has done little to build confidence in the ability of   superior” to that provided in PIPEDA.
                  the federal government to legislate prudently in the



                  172       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

In conclusion, PIPEDA could raise significant difficulties      The Privacy Act now in force does not fully satisfy these
for collection of information for disease surveillance          principles. As noted in Chapter 4, a new federal agency
purposes under public health legislation, particularly          for public health would be subject to the Act if so desig-
under provincial legislation, and its impact on provider        nated through regulation. The consent provisions are
reporting of infectious diseases requires clarification.        weaker than those envisaged in the new act, and there is
                                                                no specific test of necessity for the collection, use, or
Privacy Act and the proposed Canada Health                      disclosure of personal information. Non-consensual
Protection Act. Once health information is passed on            disclosure is permitted “for the purpose for which the
to a new federal agency, or the federal government, it          information was obtained …or for use consistent with
might become subject to the federal Privacy Act or the          that purpose,” or “for any purpose in accordance with any
proposed privacy measures set out in the Canada Health          Act of Parliament or any regulation.” Thus, the importance
Protection Act draft discussion document.                       of the objective, the necessity of using identifiable
                                                                information, and the weighing of the benefits obtained
Identifiable personal health information is information         against the damage done to the individual are neither
that identifies an individual or can reasonably be expected     identified nor considered. The Privacy Act does not
(through data linking) to identify him/her. This informa-       impose any legal obligation to use those measures which
tion is at issue in infectious disease surveillance. The        are the least invasive of privacy, such as de-identification,
proposed Canada Health Protection Act would grant               access on a need-to-know basis, etc.
Health Canada the power to collect identifiable personal
health information. A national system of infectious             The proposed Canada Health Protection Act discussion
disease surveillance centred either on Health Canada or         document also speaks to the issue of communication of
an independent agency would similarly require a                 identifiable personal health information between different
legislative basis for the collection of identifiable personal   governments. It suggests that Health Canada may collect
health information.                                             and use such information provided to it by other govern-
                                                                ments without an individual’s consent, when that infor-
The proposed Canada Health Protection Act usefully sets         mation is provided by another government “performing
out the principles that should govern the collection and        a public health function”, and if that other government
use of identifiable information. Informed consent is the        was authorized by law to receive the information without
presumptive norm based on disclosure of the purposes            consent in the first place. Non-consensual disclosure
for which the information is being collected. The non-          by Health Canada to other governments or public
consensual collection, use and disclosure of identifiable       institutions would be permitted in a narrower range of
personal health information are subject to necessity riders.    circumstances—i.e., when consent would be impracti-




                                                                                                                                C a n a d a
They are permitted if, and only if, (a) such non-consensual     cable or would defeat the legislative objective, and the
use is necessary in order to promote a legitimate public        public health interest would outweigh any prejudice to
health objective, (b) the objective cannot be achieved          the individual.
with non-identifiable personal health information, and
(c) the public interest in public health outweighs any          The proposed federal act accordingly is contingent in




                                                                                                                                i n
harm to the particular individual(s) concerned. The             some respects on the provincial laws surrounding privacy
collection, use and disclosure of identifiable personal         and health information. Inconsistencies in provincial
health information must infringe upon privacy interests         legislation, in turn, will lead to variability in what is


                                                                                                                                H e a l t h
to the least extent required to achieve the public health       communicated to the federal government. It is these
objective. This proportionality principle has several           types of concerns that led the Advisory Council on
dimensions: collecting or disclosing as little identifying      Health Infostructure to call in its Final Report (1999) for
information as is required in order to achieve the public       the harmonization of provincial and federal privacy
health objective; conversion to de-identified data as soon      legislation.
                                                                                                                                P u b l i c



as possible and limiting access to identifiable personal
health information; prohibiting the use of identifiable         9C.3 Summary
personal health information to make decisions about an
individual in other contexts (e.g., with respect to             Two key pieces of federal privacy legislation fall on either
disability benefits, income tax credits, etc.); and taking      side of a divide. One is too sweeping and restrictive,
                                                                                                                                o f




precautions by those to whom Health Canada discloses            while the other does not conform to protective principles
information to prevent improper use or further disclosure       that have been articulated in the proposed Canada
                                                                                                                                R e n e w a l




for an unauthorized purpose.                                    Health Protection Act. Federal privacy legislation must
                                                                be amended to properly accommodate a national system



..........................................................................................                              173
                  .................................................................................................

                  of infectious disease surveillance. It is not clear if PIPEDA   A recent report prepared for Health Canada entitled “A
                  applies to health care providers. To the extent that            Compendium of the Canadian Legislative Framework for
                  PIPEDA does apply, it threatens to undermine provider           the Declaration and Management of Infectious Diseases”
                  reporting obligations under federal and provincial law,         collects and summarizes the relevant provisions under
                  because of its tight restrictions on the non-consensual         various provincial laws. The Committee asked Prof.
                  collection of information. The impediments posed by             Choudhry to measure the public health legislation of
                  PIPEDA to federal reporting obligations could be easily         British Columbia, Ontario and Quebec against the CDC’s
                  handled through appropriate statutory language. However,        Model State Emergency Health Powers Act. Although the
                  if applicable, PIPEDA would prevail over provincial             Model Act may itself contain deficiencies, it was a
                  public health statutes. Moreover, provinces do not have         potential benchmark and springboard for analysis.
                  the ability to “opt out”. The potential difficulties posed
                  by PIPEDA to public health and disease surveillance are         9D.2 The Model State Emergency Health
                  part of a larger set of concerns regarding PIPEDA’s                  Powers Act
                  application to the health sector. PIPEDA’s application to
                  the health sector requires an urgent review, culminating        The CDC recently released a Model State Emergency
                  either in separate federal health information privacy           Health Powers Act that provides a template for state
                  legislation, or amendments to PIPEDA.                           legislatures to use in modernizing and updating their
                                                                                  public health legislation. The Model Act was formulated
                  On the other hand, the non-consensual collection, use           as part of a broader attempt to examine public health
                  and disclosure of identifiable personal health information      infrastructure in the United States in the wake of the
                  by the federal government, or by federally-created agencies,    terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. Even prior to
                  should comply with the principles of necessity and              September 11, a leading academic study had concluded
                  proportionality. The Privacy Act falls short of those           that state public health laws were badly in need of revision,
                  principles. The proposed Canada Health Protection Act           because they did not reflect contemporary understandings
                  would comply with those principles, except with respect         of disease surveillance, prevention and response; did not
                  to the treatment of data communicated to the federal            accord sufficient weight to individual privacy and liberty;
                  government by the provinces where the inconsistencies           were often fragmented (with multiple laws in place within
                  in provincial privacy legislation lead to concerns.             states applying different norms to different diseases); and
                                                                                  did not require planning in advance of public health
                  On both counts, then, as Canada moves to implement a            emergencies (including mechanisms for communication
                  stronger national system of disease surveillance, federal       and coordination within and between states, and the
                  legislation dealing with health information privacy must        clear allocation of responsibilities).
                  be reviewed and either amended or its applicability
                  clarified.                                                      The legal consultant’s review focused on provisions in
                                                                                  the Model Act dealing with disease reporting and
                                                                                  information sharing with other jurisdictions. The
                  9D. Provincial Legislation on                                   relevant provisions are summarized below.
                      Infectious Disease Outbreaks
                                                                                  • Who Must Report: The Model Act imposes reporting
                  9D.1 Background                                                   obligations on “health care providers”, which includes
                                                                                    both institutions (hospitals, medical clinics and
                  A large number of statutes and regulations set out the
                                                                                    offices, special care facilities, medical laboratories) and
                  legal framework within which provincial public officials,
                                                                                    persons (physicians, pharmacists, dentists, physician
                  health care professionals, and private individuals operate
                                                                                    assistants, nurse practitioners, registered and other
S A R S




                  to manage disease outbreaks. In the wake of SARS, one
                                                                                    nurses, paramedics, emergency medical or laboratory
                  question that must be asked is whether this legal frame-
                                                                                    technicians, and ambulance and emergency medical
                  work provides public health officials with the tools to
                                                                                    workers) that provide health care services. The
                  tackle infectious disease outbreaks, while at the same
                                                                                    definition is non-exhaustive—i.e., it could apply to
f r o m




                  time respecting the rights to privacy and physical liberty
                                                                                    other individuals and institutions not listed in the
                  of persons subject to public health legislation.
                                                                                    Model Act who provide health care services. Coroners
                                                                                    and medical examiners also owe reporting obligations.
L e a r n i n g




                  174       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

• Triggering Event For Report: Reporting must take place     • What Information Must be Reported: The report must
  in “all cases of persons who harbor any illness or           include: the specific illness or condition; the name,
  health condition that may be potential causes of a           date of birth, sex, race, occupation, and home and
  public health emergency.” The Model Act does not             work addresses of the patient; the name and address
  require that the person suffer from the illness, and         of the person making the report, and any other
  therefore may include persons who have merely been           information required to locate the patient for
  exposed to or infected with an illness. However, the         follow-up.
  Model Act does require that the person actually
                                                             • Information Sharing with Other Jurisdictions: The Model
  harbor the illness; a “reasonable suspicion” or the
                                                               Act requires a state public authority to notify federal
  prospect that the person “may” harbor the illness do
                                                               authorities if it “learns of a case of a reportable illness or
  not appear to be sufficient.
                                                               health condition, an unusual cluster, or a suspicious
• Reportable Diseases: The reporting obligation extends        event that may be the cause of a public health
  to “any illness or health condition that may be              emergency.” The scope of the information that is
  potential causes of a public health emergency.”              shared is limited by a test of necessity—that is, it must
  Reportable diseases include, but are not limited to, a       be “information necessary for the treatment, control,
  list of biotoxins issued by the US federal government,       investigation and prevention of a public health
  and any illnesses or health conditions designated by         emergency.”
  state public health authorities. A public health
  emergency—a key concept in the Model Act—is                9D.3 Initial Assessment of Provincial
  defined as follows:                                             Laws in light of the Model Act
     an occurrence or imminent threat of an illness or
                                                             We review below the differences observed between the
     health condition that:
                                                             Model Act and the public health laws of British Columbia,
     (1) is believed to be caused by any of the following:   Ontario, and Quebec.
         (i) bioterrorism; (N.B.: bioterrorism is also
             defined);                                       Who must report: The Model Act imposes reporting
         (ii) the appearance of a novel or previously        obligations on a wide range of individuals and
              controlled or eradicated infectious agent or   institutions within the health sector. Legislation in
              biological toxin;                              British Columbia, Ontario and Quebec generally follows
         (iii) a natural disaster;                           this pattern, albeit through slightly different means.
         (iv) a chemical attack or accidental release; or    Ontario’s legislation is most similar to the Model Act, in




                                                                                                                                C a n a d a
         (v) a nuclear attack or accident; and               that it exhaustively enumerates who is under a reporting
                                                             obligation. British Columbia, by contrast, imposes a
    (2) poses a high probability of any of the following
                                                             duty on “any person”. While this latter provision has
        harms:
                                                             the benefit of flexibility and adaptability to an ever-
        (i) a large number of deaths in the affected
                                                             changing landscape of institutional and individual
            population;
                                                             providers, it comes at the expense of clarity and




                                                                                                                                i n
        (ii) a large number of serious or long-term
                                                             accountability. Quebec’s law (which was recently
             disabilities in the affected population; or
                                                             enacted) raises a different sort of concern—the only
        (iii) widespread exposure to an infectious or


                                                                                                                                H e a l t h
                                                             health professionals with reporting obligations are
              toxic agent that poses a significant risk of
                                                             physicians. Nurses and other health professionals who
              substantial harm to a large number of
                                                             might be the first to identify a case of infection appear to
              people in the affected population.
                                                             owe no reporting obligation. As well, hospital
• When Report Must Be Made: The report must be made
                                                             administrators do not appear to be under a duty to
  within 24 hours.
                                                                                                                                P u b l i c


                                                             report, notwithstanding their overall responsibility for
• To Whom Report Must Be Made: The report must be            the institutions which they manage.
  made to “the public health authority”, which is the
  state public health authority or any local public
  health authority.
                                                                                                                                o f
                                                                                                                                R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                              175
                  .................................................................................................

                  Triggering Event: The triggering event for the reporting        Duty to Share Information with Other Jurisdictions: The
                  obligation under the Model Act is that a person “harbor”        Model Act requires that federal officials be notified in the
                  an illness, which includes persons who have been infected       event of a public health emergency. Although provincial
                  with and who suffer from the illness. In British Columbia,      laws govern non-emergency situations, they nonetheless
                  only physicians are obliged to report cases of infection;       should contain some obligation on the part of provincial
                  other reporting obligations apply if an individual is           officials to report information to their provincial and
                  suffering from or has died from a communicable disease.         federal counterparts. According to the information
                  It would appear that other health care providers need not       contained in “A Compendium of the Canadian Legislative
                  report instances of infection. Similarly, in Ontario, only      Framework for the Declaration and Management of
                  physicians and hospital administrators appear to be under       Infectious Diseases,” no such obligations exist. This does
                  an obligation to report instances of infection. Laboratories    not mean that such communications do not occur in
                  might be required to report instances of infection,             practice.
                  depending on the information yielded by a test. Quebec’s
                  broad language, requiring reporting in the case of a            In conclusion, provincial public health laws measure up
                  suspicion “of a threat to the health of the population”         reasonably well against the CDC state template. Some
                  would presumably extend to infections.                          variation is probably attributable to the emergent focus
                                                                                  of the Model Act. However, some standardization
                  List of Reportable Diseases: The Model Act is written against   across provinces with respect to timelines and legal
                  the backdrop of September 11, 2001 and, as a consequence,       obligations to share data with federal and provincial
                  is focused on public health emergencies, particularly           counterparts should be considered in the context of the
                  those arising from bioterrorism. In this respect, it is not     intergovernmental review of public health legislation
                  a good model for a general purpose public health statute.       recommended above.
                  British Columbia, Ontario and Quebec appear to require
                  the reporting of largely similar diseases vis-à-vis one
                  another. One problem is that triggering events are some-
                                                                                  9E. Federal Health Emergencies
                  times undefined. For example, in Ontario a “communicable        Chapter 5 alluded to the federal Emergency Preparedness
                  disease outbreak” is undefined, as is a “disease outbreak       Act (R.S. 1985, c. 6 (4th Supp.)) proclaimed in 1988.
                  or occurrence” in British Columbia. Although the lack of        That legislation delineates wide-ranging obligations on
                  definition promotes flexibility, the lack of clear definition   ministers to ensure that their departments take action to
                  might lead to over- or under-reporting.                         “develop policies and programs for achieving an appro-
                                                                                  priate state of national civil preparedness for emergencies.”
                  When Report Must Be Made: The Model Act requires reporting      It also specifies a responsibility for liaison with provinces
                  within 24 hours, presumably because of its focus on             and a coordinating role for the federal government. Its
                  emergent biological threats. Within British Columbia,           design dovetails with the federal Emergencies Act (R.S. 1985,
                  there are specific reporting obligations ranging from           c. 22 (4th Supp.) that received assent in 1989 and replaced
                  24 hours to 7 days. Quebec has a uniform, province-             the problematic War Measures Act.
                  wide standard of 48 hours. Ontario and Quebec both use
                  imprecise language, such as “as soon as possible” and           The Emergencies Act describes various categories of emer-
                  “promptly”, which impedes clarity and accountability.           gencies. The most salient is the subcategory of public
                                                                                  welfare emergency that includes “an emergency that is
                  To Whom Report Must be Made: The Model Act requires that        caused by a real or imminent...disease in human beings,
                  all reports be made to the state public health authority,       animals or plants...that results or may result in a danger
                  to facilitate data centralization. The overwhelming             to life or property, social disruption or a breakdown in
                  majority of reporting obligations in British Columbia,
S A R S




                                                                                  the flow of essential goods, services or resources, so serious
                  Ontario and Quebec require information to be sent to            as to be a national emergency.” It defines a “national
                  the medical officer of health (British Columbia, Ontario)       emergency”, in turn, as “an urgent and critical situation …
                  or the public health director (Quebec). As a consequence,       that seriously endangers the lives, health or safety of
                  public health laws in these provinces also facilitate data      Canadians and is of such proportions as to exceed the
f r o m




                  centralization.                                                 capacity or authority of a province to deal with it.”

                  What Information Must be Reported: All three provincial
                  acts provide reasonably detailed delineation of what
L e a r n i n g




                  must be reported.




                  176       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

The federal government’s effectiveness in coordinating           Earlier in this chapter, we signaled our discomfort with
health emergencies on a national basis is arguably               the idea that a federally-appointed public health official
compromised by the lack of specific legislation. During a        could commandeer provincial/territorial and local public
truly national health emergency, Health Canada has two           health officials for matters such as disease surveillance.
vastly different options for asserting a ‘command-and-           However, in a public health emergency, where such
control’ function necessary for a national response.             powers would be exercised only temporarily and then
Officials refer to these with some frustration as ‘the           only after an assessment that the gravity of the situation
sledgehammer’ and the ‘tackhammer’. The former option,           posed a clear danger to the health of Canadians that
implementation of the Emergencies Act, can only be               could not otherwise be managed, the basis for those
invoked if a high threshold is crossed as noted above.           objections is blunted.
The Emergencies Act confers very wide powers on the
federal government and has not been invoked since its            As currently proposed, the Canada Health Protection Act
passage. The latter option essentially involves “requesting”     does not include any discussion of health emergencies.
collaboration from public health partners.                       In part, this is because the proposed act adheres to a
                                                                 fairly narrow understanding of federal jurisdiction,
The Canadian Medical Association has argued in a detailed        i.e., jurisdiction over international and interprovincial
submission that emergency managers require a public              movement of persons, whereas public health emergencies
health legislative platform that lies between these two          might encompass a broader range of circumstances.
extremes and facilitates a coordinated response at all levels    The Canadian Medical Association proposal allows for
of government for public health emergencies. They                movement into provincial jurisdiction by the federal
propose a specific ‘Health Emergencies Act’ with graded          government in the event of a truly grave emergency. The
increases in federal responsibility and jurisdiction as the      constitutional basis for federal emergencies legislation
scope and scale of an emergency spreads. Based on their          would be the emergency branch of the POGG powers.
brief and a confidential technical document, the Committee
infers that the proposal involves provincial/territorial         The Committee believes that the Canadian Medical
consultation at every stage and provincial/territorial consent   Association proposal has merit and recommends that, as
for a claim of jurisdiction only for lower level health          part of the legislative renewal process already underway,
emergencies. The Committee agrees with some informants           two steps be taken. First, the intergovernmental initiative
who have suggested that the threshold for non-consensual         in public health legislation should consider extant emer-
federal jurisdiction in the Canadian Medical Association         gency legislation in the light of public health emergencies
scheme should be shifted ‘upwards’, but this modification        with a view to harmonization as appropriate across
does not invalidate the underlying concept.                      provinces and territories. Second, consideration should




                                                                                                                                C a n a d a
                                                                 be given to a federal health emergencies act to be activated
As the level of government uniquely charged with                 in lockstep with provincial emergency acts in the event
protecting the national interest, the federal government         of a pan-Canadian health emergency. We leave to the
has the strongest legitimacy to act alone when an                relevant experts whether this falls under the proposed
infectious disease outbreak potentially has interprovincial      Canada Health Protection Act, under legislation to




                                                                                                                                i n
and/or international dimensions. Moreover, it enjoys a           establish the new Canadian Agency for Public Health,
comparative institutional advantage in regulating matters        both, or a separate legislative initiative.
with an interprovincial or international dimension.


                                                                                                                                H e a l t h
Conversely, provincial public health officials enjoy the
greatest legitimacy in responding to outbreaks that are
largely local in impact. A graded approach to federal
intervention would complement, rather than replace,
existing provincial, territorial and municipal public
                                                                                                                                P u b l i c



health structures, helping again to stitch them together
into a national system.
                                                                                                                                o f
                                                                                                                                R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                              177
                  .................................................................................................

                                                                              The Joint Centre working group suggests that an ethical
                  9F.     Ethical Issues and Lessons                          framework be developed that would address the five
                          from the SARS Outbreak                              issues noted above, and that would ensure that Canada is
                                                                              better prepared to deal with future health crises involving
                  The SARS outbreak posed a number of ethical challenges.     highly contagious diseases.
                  Decision makers were required to balance individual
                  freedoms against the common good, fear for personal         Four of these points bear brief elaboration.
                  safety against the duty to treat the sick, and economic
                  losses against the need to contain the spread of a deadly   Civil Liberties: During both SARS outbreaks, health care
                  disease. Decisions were often made with limited             practitioners, patients and families were asked to place
                  information and under short deadlines.                      themselves under ten-day quarantines in their homes in
                                                                              order to reduce the risk of exposure of an infectious
                  A working group of the University of Toronto Joint Centre   disease to the community. Other strategies used during
                  for Bioethics undertook to draw the ethical lessons from    SARS were widespread availability of disposable masks,
                  the challenges of and responses to SARS in Toronto2.        self-surveillance and work-home quarantine (i.e., limiting
                  The working group identified five general categories of     contacts to those necessary for duties in the health care
                  ethical issues arising from the SARS experience:            setting), and restrictions on assembly of groups. Although
                                                                              the Health Protection and Promotion Act 3 gives officials the
                  • Public health versus civil liberties: There are times     power to force non-compliant individuals into quarantine,
                    when the interests of protecting public health override   this was used only once during the outbreak.
                    some individual rights, such as the freedom of move-
                    ment. In public health, this takes its most extreme       Applying the principle of reciprocity, society has a duty
                    form with involuntary commitment to quarantine.           to provide support and other alternatives to those whose
                  • Privacy of information and the public’s need to know:     rights have been infringed under quarantine. Intriguingly,
                    While the individual has a right to privacy, the state    after returning from quarantines, some health care
                    may temporarily suspend this privacy right in case of     practitioners reported feeling disconnected from the
                    serious public health risks, when revealing private       current state of the organization4. Focus groups with
                    medical information would help protect public health.     front-line workers also revealed that some in quarantine
                                                                              wished to continue participating in the battle against
                  • Duty of care: Health care professionals have a duty to    SARS by contacting patients and families to provide
                    care for the sick while minimizing the possibility of     support and answer questions, or by helping with
                    transmitting diseases to the uninfected. Institutions     contact tracing.
                    in turn have a reciprocal duty to support and protect
                    health care workers to help them cope with the            Privacy: Disease reporting during an outbreak carries the
                    situation, and to recognize their contributions.          risk of a breach of confidentiality. Boundaries of privacy
                  • The problem of collateral damage: Restrictions on entry   vary from person to person. Some believe that there is a
                    to SARS-affected hospitals meant that people were         risk of privacy infringement only if confidentiality is not
                    denied medical care, sometimes for severe illnesses.      maintained and a social stigma or loss of employment
                    There were also restrictions on visits to patients in     ensues from the breach. The other view is that a privacy
                    SARS-affected hospitals. Decision makers faced duties     infringement is wrong regardless of whether any harm
                    of equity and proportionality in making decisions that    occurs as a result5. In either event, under the ethical value
                    weighed the potential harm from these restrictions        of proportionality, officials must use the least intrusive
                    against benefits from containment of the spread of        method to obtain their goal. Legislation such as the Health
                                                                              Protection and Promotion Act prohibits the release of
S A R S




                    SARS through rapid and definitive intervention.
                                                                              personal information except in very specific circumstances
                  • Global interdependence: SARS underlines the               where there is a public good to be served or added protection
                    increasing risk of emerging diseases and their rapid      obtained by releasing an individual’s name.
                    spread. It points to a duty to strengthen the global
f r o m




                    health system in the interests of all nations.
L e a r n i n g




                  178      .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

During SARS, Toronto Public Health named only two                Many of these were avoidable, as they arose from
names—that of the deceased index case for Toronto and            directives around N95 masks and fit-testing which were
her deceased son, and this was done with the informed            either more stringent or interpreted more stringently,
consent of the surviving family members, based on their          than necessary. Health care organizations did offer a
understanding that this extraordinary step was necessary         variety of psychological supports to their staff, but many
for the protection of public health. An unknown number           of these measures were instituted after SARS, rather than
of people had attended a funeral visitation at the home          during the outbreak itself. What also emerged very
of the deceased index case, and public health authorities        clearly was that health care workers under siege in an
had no way of contacting these people individually to            emergency such as SARS greatly valued and deserved
advise them that they had been exposed and to watch for          strong support from community and political leaders as
symptoms and remain in isolation for ten days. Most of           well as co-workers and administrators.
the remaining family members were already hospitalized
and too ill to provide sufficient detail. Two probable SARS      Collateral effects: The ethical trade-offs posed by the
cases identified themselves to Toronto Public Health as a        collateral effects of caring for SARS patients were numerous.
direct result of this announcement. Both were health             For example, the Catholic Health Association of Canada
care workers who could have spread the virus further             noted in its submission the serious impact on many
with disastrous results. These details illustrate the knife-     patients, friends, and families from restricted visiting
edge on which these decisions rest.                              hours. Decision making was particularly challenging in
                                                                 critical care units8. The principle of equity required that
Duty of care: Health care providers constantly weighed           decision makers balance controlling the spread of the
serious health risks to themselves and their families against    disease on the one hand, and the rights of non-infected
their obligation to care for patients with SARS. A substantial   patients to access medical care, particularly urgent
percentage of the probable SARS cases involved front-line        services on the other. The enormous human toll of the
providers. Nurses and physicians were at particular risk.        disruption to the system lies just beneath the statistics in
Overall, it appears that 168 people or about 40% of those        Chapter 8. Countervailing this impact is the very real
infected were health care workers. The Canadian Medical          likelihood that the uncontained spread of SARS could
Association Code of Ethics calls on physicians to                have killed thousands. Such trade-offs make it very
“consider first the well-being of the patient6,” while the       difficult to apply any ethical Procrustean bed in
Canadian Nurses Association Code of Ethics for nursing           hindsight to the decisions made. However, an ethical
stipulates that “nurses must provide care first and              framework of some type may be useful for future
foremost toward the health and well-being of the person,         decision makers.
family or community in their care7.” Other health care




                                                                                                                                 C a n a d a
professions in Canada have considered or adopted similar         To this list the Committee would add two other issues.
codes. SARS has taught us, however, that this ethical
duty must be balanced by a countervailing duty: not to           First, the Canadian Association of Medical Microbiologists
place others at risk by coming to work while ill and             has noted the ethical challenges that arose in undertaking
potentially contagious. What remains unclear are the             research during the SARS outbreak. Issues arose that cut




                                                                                                                                 i n
limits to this duty: What is the point at which the duty of      across individual institutions and agencies, necessitating
care is balanced by a right to refuse dangerous tasks?           unprecedented coordination of expedited ethical reviews of
How is the duty of care modified by the occupational             research protocols and outbreak investigation proposals.


                                                                                                                                 H e a l t h
circumstances and professional obligations of different
health care workers?                                             Second, scientific credit and collaboration also pose
                                                                 ethical challenges during an outbreak. For example,
Just as health care practitioners have a duty to care for the    while many academic clinicians were fighting the SARS
sick, health care organizations clearly have a reciprocal        outbreak in Toronto, research scientists were testing the
                                                                                                                                 P u b l i c



duty to support and protect their workers. This meant            samples that were flooding the National Microbiology
providing the necessary safety equipment and appropriate         Laboratory in Winnipeg. They collaborated with the
education regarding the use of such equipment, providing         British Columbia Centre for Disease Control and
information on risks and the need for precautionary              genomics experts salaried by the British Columbia Cancer
measures and ensuring a safe working environment.                Agency to sequence the Toronto strain of the coronavirus.
                                                                                                                                 o f




Notwithstanding the enormous efforts that many insti-            The University of British Columbia subsequently
tutions made with respect to internal communication              purchased a full-page advertisement during the outbreak
                                                                                                                                 R e n e w a l




and safeguards for health care workers, serious tensions         to claim credit for the discovery. We thus had the
arose with respect to occupational health and safety.            situation where some academics were fighting a battle for


..........................................................................................                               179
                  .................................................................................................

                  all of Canada against a new infectious agent, and others       is ample precedent in Canada for patenting the genome
                  were consumed with offering scientific advice to bring         of a virus. However, the ramifications of these practices
                  the outbreak under control, while others capitalized           are important, particularly where public funding or public
                  brilliantly on the availability of specimens and data to       health issues are concerned. This issue falls outside the
                  the benefit of all, winning scientific kudos in the process.   Committee’s mandate, but underscores the continuing
                  How does one apportion a fair distribution of scientific       uncertainty and concerns from a number of quarters
                  credit in these difficult circumstances? Guidelines are        about the patenting of organisms and genes in general.
                  needed to facilitate collaborative research and research       The Committee urges continued vigilance and debate
                  publications during infectious disease outbreaks,              concerning the application of the Patent Act and the
                  particularly in a relatively small academic community          corresponding frameworks surrounding the patent process
                  such as that which exists in Canada.                           to the unique challenges of patenting micro-organisms
                                                                                 and other living entities.
                  A related ethical issue that arose from SARS is the seeking
                  of patents on the SARS-associated coronavirus. Researchers
                  in the United States, Canada and Hong Kong9 have applied
                                                                                 9G. Recommendations
                  for patents on the coronavirus and its gene sequence.          In light of the foregoing issues, the Committee
                  The US CDC and the British Columbia Cancer Agency              recommends that:
                  publicly acknowledged taking this course of action to
                  ensure that the virus and the sequence remain in the public    9.1 The Government of Canada should embark on a
                  domain (it is important to note that the sequences were            time-limited intergovernmental initiative with
                  published in Science magazine in early May, 2003)10.               a view to renewing the legislative framework
                  A news item in the June 20, 2003 edition of The Lancet             for disease surveillance and outbreak manage-
                  reported that the US National Institute of Allergy and             ment in Canada, as well as harmonizing emer-
                  Infectious Diseases is making a SARS genome “chip”                 gency legislation as it bears on public health
                  available to researchers around the world, free of charge,         emergencies.
                  in an effort to spur research. The “chip” contains the
                  29,700 DNA base pairs of the SARS coronavirus designed         9.2 In the event that a coordinated system of rules
                  from data from institutes in the US, Canada, and Asia              for infectious disease surveillance and outbreak
                  that had sequenced the complete SARS coronavirus                   management cannot be established by the
                  genome.                                                            combined effects of the F/P/T Network for
                                                                                     Communicable Disease Control, the Public Health
                  While this is a positive development, the patenting of             Partnerships Program, and the above-referenced
                  organisms and genes such as SARS remains an issue and              intergovernmental legislative review, the
                  has raised myriad concerns11,12. The current patent                Government of Canada should initiate the
                  system in Canada was not designed to address questions             drafting of default legislation to set up such a
                  of DNA patenting and the commercialization of the                  system of rules, clarifying F/P/T interactions as
                  human genome. Generally, raw products of nature are                regards public health matters with specific
                  not patentable. However, a patent may be granted to the            reference to infectious diseases.
                  entire process of discovering and isolating, in the            9.3 As part of Health Canada’s legislative renewal
                  laboratory, strings of DNA that were not obvious before,           process currently underway, the Government
                  rather than to a gene as it exists in nature. In order to          of Canada should consider incorporating in
                  patent a gene, a sequence or other similar material, the           legislation a mechanism for dealing with
                  inventor must modify or identify the novel genetic                 health emergencies which would be activated
                  sequences. The product of the sequence must be modified
S A R S




                                                                                     in lockstep with provincial emergency acts in
                  and the function in nature must be explained. These                the event of a pan-Canadian health emergency.
                  matters have been given point in Canada by the narrow
                  decision (5-4) of the Supreme Court, in December 2002,
                  to reject the patent of the Harvard ‘Onco-mouse’, not
f r o m




                  because of any primary principled objection to the concept,
                  but because extant Canadian patent legislation did not
                  contemplate such a claim. Patents had previously been
                  granted in Canada for unicellular organisms; thus, there
L e a r n i n g




                  180       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

9.4 The Government of Canada should launch an
    urgent and comprehensive review of the
                                                         REFERENCES
    application of the Protection of Information         1. Personal communication: Morris GD. Centers for
    Privacy and Electronic Documents Act to the             Disease Control and Prevention’s Public Health
    health sector, with a view to setting out               Infrastructure. Prepared August 2003.
    regulations that would clarify the applicability
    of this new law to the health sector, and/or         2. Singer P, Benatar SR, Bernstein M, Daar AS, Dickens
    creating new privacy legislation specific to            BM, MacRae SK, Upshur REG, Wright L, Shaul RZ,
    health matters.                                         “Ethics and SARS: Learning Lessons from the Toronto
                                                            Experience,” June 18, 2003, submitted to National
9.5 The Government of Canada should launch a                Advisory Committee on SARS & Public Health. See
    comprehensive review of the treatment of                http://www.utoronto.ca/jcb/SARS_workingpaper.asp
    personal health information under the Privacy
    Act, with a view to setting out regulations or       3. R.S.O. 1990, c. H-7.
    legislation specific to the health sector.           4. Maunder R., et al, “The immediate psychological and
9.6 The Canadian Agency for Public Health should            occupational impact of the 2003 SARS outbreak in a
    create a Public Health Ethics Working Group to          teaching hospital,” Canadian Medical Association
    develop an ethical framework to guide public            Journal, 2003: 168:1245-1251.
    health systems and health care organizations         5. Kass N., “An Ethics Framework for Public Health,”
    during emergency public health situations such          Public Health Matters, 2001: 91(11):1776-1782.
    as infectious disease outbreaks. In addition to
    the usual ethical issues, the Working Group          6. Canadian Medical Association, Code of Conduct
    should develop guidelines for collaboration and         (www.cma.ca).
    co-authorship with fair apportioning of author-      7. Canadian Nurses Association, Code of Conduct, page 10
    ship and related credit to academic participants        (www.cna-nurses.ca/pages/ethics/ethicframe.htm).
    in outbreak investigation and related research,
    and develop templates for expedited ethics reviews   8. Bernstein M, Hawryluck, L., “Challenging beliefs and
    of applied research protocols in the face of out-       ethical concepts: the collateral damage of SARS,”
    breaks and similar public health emergencies.           Critical Care, 2003: 7: 269-271.

9.7 F/P/T departments/ministries of health should        9. Gold, Richard, “SARS genome patent: symptom or
    facilitate a dialogue with health care workers,         disease?,” The Lancet, 2003: 361(9374) 2002-2003.




                                                                                                                      C a n a d a
    their unions/associations, professional              10. Stagg-Elliott, Victoria, “SARS spurs race for a cure—
    regulatory bodies, experts in employment law             and for patents, AMNEWs, May 26, 2003.
    and ethics, and other pertinent government
    departments/ministries concerning duties of          11. Ibid.
    care toward persons with contagious illnesses        12. Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care, Government
    and countervailing rights to refuse dangerous            of Ontario, Canada, “Ontario Report to Premiers:




                                                                                                                      i n
    duties in health care settings.                          Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting New
                                                             Territory in Healthcare,” January 2002.


                                                                                                                      H e a l t h
                                                                                                                      P u b l i c
                                                                                                                      o f
                                                                                                                      R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                      181
                               SARS and Public Health
Chapter 10


EMERGING INFECTIOUS DISEASE
RESEARCH IN CANADA –
Lessons from SARS
.................................................................................................



The Canadian experience with SARS reminds us that the         these types of investments are not aligned with the
investigation of an epidemic is research—research conducted   unique modalities of research and evaluation that are
at a feverish pace. Chapter 5 outlined how the research       embedded in core public health functions.
conducted during an outbreak is essential to effective
response measures and ultimate control of the epidemic.       A related challenge is the profoundly multidisciplinary
Unfortunately, with a few notable exceptions, Canadian        nature of effective research targeting an outbreak or
governments and public health institutions did not heed       epidemic. Many disciplines are needed: e.g., epidemiology,
the warnings of the 1994 Lac Tremblant declaration and        biostatistics, mathematics, medical microbiology, clinical
build the necessary research capacity for emerging            medicine, laboratory science, health systems research,
infectious diseases. Research and evaluative capacity in      social sciences, and health policy. All must be engaged
public health more generally was not sustained during         for the response to be optimally effective. For example,
the budget roll-backs of the 1990s, as deficit-cutting        our review of the SARS outbreak in Canada has already
reductions in federal transfers limited provincial and        illustrated how the ability to do etiologic or diagnostic
municipal spending.                                           research requires good epidemiologic and clinical data
                                                              along with laboratory research capacity. A shortfall in
A more fundamental problem, however, is one of culture        one dimension cannot be covered by strength in another.
and commitment. Quebec’s National Institute of Public




                                                                                                                            C a n a d a
Health and the British Columbia Centre for Disease            The need to value and support a research culture in
Control [BC CDC] have supported research, and Health          public health arises from more than its positive impact
Canada’s realignment in 2000 provided tangible support        on our ability to understand and control outbreaks of
for in-house science capacity. However, the Committee         infectious disease; our standing in research affects how
perceives that public health agencies and governments         other nations see Canada and its public health system.
have often regarded research capacity as academic,            Science—a system for solving problems and addressing




                                                                                                                            i n
irrelevant, and discretionary rather than the core public     unknowns—is the organizing principle for outbreak
health function that it is. F/P/T governments have signifi-   management and epidemic response. If other nations lose


                                                                                                                            H e a l t h
cantly increased health research funding across Canada        confidence in the scientific capacity and leadership in
in recent years, but the absolute levels of investment        our public health system, it can have a lasting negative
have favoured either investigator-initiated fundamental       effect on how other countries choose to interact with
research or R&D activities that are amenable to short-term    Canada, be it through tourism, trade, academic and cultural
economic pay-offs through private partnerships. The           exchanges, or through multilateral bodies such as the
                                                                                                                            P u b l i c



Committee strongly supports ongoing and greater invest-       World Health Organization [WHO]. Last, beyond research
ments in “curiosity-driven” research; as discussed below,     and evaluation focused on infectious diseases, public
critical capacity for epidemiologic investigation and         health must have a strong scientific foundation and a
outbreak response is built in part by nurturing the related   capacity for critical self-evaluation through generation
and fundamental science. Similarly, we recognize that         and application of evidence-based programming.
                                                                                                                            o f




the private sector is not only a major investor in research
but plays the key role in commercializing beneficial
                                                                                                                            R e n e w a l




discoveries made with public sector support. However,




..........................................................................................                          183
                  .................................................................................................

                                                                                glance, the performance appears reasonable. However,
                  10A. Emerging Infectious Disease                              these research activities arguably address only a minimal
                       Research: A First Look at the                            and essential set of issues. Our preparedness for the next
                                                                                respiratory virus season, when SARS could reappear
                       Canadian Record on SARS                                  insidiously amidst thousands of Canadians with cough
                  Experience with other emerging infectious diseases—HIV,       and fever of a more benign nature, would be enhanced
                  Hepatitis C and West Nile virus, to name but three—has        by garnering answers to many other questions.
                  long since highlighted deficiencies in how Canadian
                  research is organized to respond to emergency situations      In Table 2, the Canadian performance is compared to the
                  and significant new infectious disease threats. Many          international research response. Again, this assessment
                  experts believe that a slow and poorly-coordinated research   was compiled to the end of July 2003. Although other
                  response had an adverse effect on Canada’s measures to        valuable publications have since appeared, this is a context
                  control HIV and Hepatitis C, with resulting adverse           where timeliness of research is critical. The numbers of
                  impacts on the health of Canadians and enormous direct        publications and the impact factor of publications are
                  and indirect costs. With West Nile virus, we have not         detailed. The impact factor is one measure, albeit
                  as yet been able to generate a clear epidemiologic picture    decidedly imperfect, of the uptake of scientific publications.
                  of the extent of the problem in humans and the severity       It tallies how often on average papers are cited when
                  of health risks involved. The seasonal nature of the          published in the journal in question. High-quality and
                  disease means that research capacity must be poised and       more topical papers tend to be published in higher-impact
                  ready to respond as cases appear. Our current levels and      journals, such as Science, Nature, the Journal of the American
                  modes of organizing and funding public health research        Medical Association, the New England Journal of Medicine,
                  make this difficult.                                          The Lancet, and the British Medical Journal. Although
                                                                                Canada has contributed 20% of the published world
                  Earlier chapters have already indicated that the research     literature on SARS, many of these publications are in
                  response to SARS in Canada was uneven: some aspects           journals with low impact—they have limited influence
                  were performed well; others were not. Research into the       on thinking and global knowledge. In addition, there is
                  cause of SARS, the characterization of the agent, the         double counting of reports that were published simulta-
                  development of diagnostic tests, and generation of initial    neously in the Canada Diseases Weekly Report and the
                  clinical descriptions were all conducted and communicated     US Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. Overall, the
                  relatively rapidly. Research on the immune response           impact of Canadian research ranked ahead only of China,
                  with the goal of developing a SARS coronavirus vaccine        notwithstanding the fact the indexing services do not list
                  has progressed well. On the other hand, research on           Chinese language publications and they were accordingly
                  many fundamental epidemiologic aspects of SARS,               assigned an arbitrary weight approximating zero.
                  including research on the spectrum of disease and such
                  questions as the duration of viral shedding and the           The weakness in some areas may speak to the importance
                  period of infectivity, has lacked cohesion. Even now we       of interdisciplinary linkages as highlighted earlier. We
                  remain unable to address many of these questions. As a        noted, for example, that the performance in some aspects
                  developed country with an acclaimed health care system,       of diagnostic work was undercut by weaknesses in
                  Canada has no excuse for its inability to develop an          collecting epidemiologic and clinical data and integrating
                  epidemiologic analysis of SARS. The Canadian performance,     these data with laboratory work. The weak performance
                  as already indicated in Chapter 2, contrasts sharply with     in research on pathogenesis may be a result of Canada’s
                  Hong Kong. Scientists in Hong Kong were able to               failure to develop a large cadre of clinician scientists, the
                  produce seminal epidemiologic and clinical descriptions       fact that some clinician-scientists who had a direct
                                                                                opportunity to study SARS were utterly consumed with
S A R S




                  while responding to a larger epidemic than Canada faced.
                  Our incapacity arose in part from previously-identified       managing clinical aspects of the outbreak, and inadequate
                  issues of leadership, coordination, data collection and       linkages between clinicians and basic scientists. We turn
                  management, data sharing, and weak mechanisms to link         next to a brief comparison of the research response to
                  epidemiologic and clinical to laboratory data. It also        SARS with what could or should have been done.
f r o m




                  reflects lack of research capacity and advanced planning.

                  The Canadian research response to SARS as of early
L e a r n i n g




                  August is summarized in Table 1. The issues listed under
                  each type of research are a non-exhaustive summary of
                  the research questions that needed answers. At first


                  184       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


 T   A B L E            1
 A Preliminary Summary of the Canadian Research response to SARS as of early August 2003

 Type of research           Issues Addressed                          Canadian           Enabling or Limiting Factors
                                                                    Performance*
 Emergent Research
 Epidemiology and           • Incubation period                          ++              Problems in data management and sharing,
 public health              • Attack rates                               ++              as well as poor linkage of laboratory and
                            • Routes of transmission                     +++             epidemiologic data, limited and are still limiting
                            • Mortality rates                             ++             our ability to do these types of studies.
                            • Infection control issues                   +++
                            • Effectiveness of quarantine,                +
                              travel advisories, passenger
                              screening
 Etiologic and              • Identification of causative agent.         +++              Work was complicated by changing case
 Diagnostic                 • Most appropriate specimens                  +               definitions, changing classification of cases and
                              source and timing.                                          limited integration of clinical and epidemiologic
                            • Sensitivity, specificity of                 +               data with laboratory data.
                              different diagnostic tests
 Clinical                   • Spectrum of disease                         ++              An initial clinical descriptive paper was
                            • Clinical manifestations                    +++              published, plus an analysis of critically ill
                            • Therapy of disease                          +               patients; but little work on other aspects
                            • Long term sequelae                          +               thus far.
 Pathogenesis               • Mechanisms of disease causation             ++              Some opportunities lost because of slowness to
                            • Animal models                              +++              engage basic scientists or limited number of clinician
                            • Genetics of susceptibility to disease       ++              scientists. More opportunities remain unexploited.
 Virology                   • Basic biology                               –               Existing collaborative networks facilitated genome
                            • Genome sequencing                          +++              and protein work.
                            • Protein characterization                   +++




                                                                                                                                                       C a n a d a
 Immunobiology              • Correlates of protective immunity          ++              These studies are underway.
                            • Vaccine development                        ++
 Post Event Research
 Health Systems             • Cost effectiveness of interventions         +               The type of research is not essential early in the
 Research                   • Unintended consequences                     +               epidemic response and is appropriately




                                                                                                                                                       i n
                              of interventions                                            commencing now. However, the lack of linked
                            • General Health Economics                    +               and comprehensive data will impede the quality of



                                                                                                                                                       H e a l t h
                                                                                          these studies for some time.
 Social and economic        • Individual impacts of the epidemic          +               CIHR has a future competition planned in
                              and interventions.                                          these areas.
                            • Behavioural research                        +
                            • Societal impacts of the epidemic            +
                              and interventions
                                                                                                                                                       P u b l i c




 Policy                     • Lessons learned                            ++              These are currently in progress.
                            • Public health implications                 ++
 * +++ Indicates Canadian scientists completed research on the issue, which has been communicated scientifically as well as publicly. For most
        sub-categories of emergent research, this would be considered an adequate or better response.
                                                                                                                                                       o f




 ++ Indicates research work is in progress.
 + Indicates research projects are being planned.
 – Indicates no current work in progress or that there is no longer the ability to do the work.
                                                                                                                                                       R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                                                       185
                  .................................................................................................


                    T   A B L E            2
                    Numbers and Impact Ranking of Canadian SARS Research Reports as of Early August, 2003

                                                                     Canada         United       Hong Kong          China           United        Singapore
                                                                                    States                                         Kingdom
                    Epidemiology          Publications                  6              2               3             10                2                2
                    and Public Health
                                          Mean Impact Factor           3.4            15.0           16.3            0.1             18.0             0.0
                    Etiology and          Publications                                 2               2              2
                    Diagnostic
                                          Mean Impact Factor                          15.0            9.0            0.0
                    Clinical              Publications                  8              2              13             15                                 6
                                          Mean Impact Factor           10.5           6.5            10.1            0.3                              4.5
                    Virology              Publications                  2              1               3              9                                 1
                                          Mean Impact Factor           11.5           23.3           17.5            0.2                              13.3
                    Immunobiology         Publications                                                                4
                                          Mean Impact Factor                                                         0.6
                    Social and            Publications                  7              1                                               1
                    Economic
                                          Mean Impact Factor           1.3            23.3                                            0.8
                    Policy                Publications                  1                                                              1
                                          Mean Impact Factor           13.3                                                           6.6
                    Totals                                              24             8              21             40                4                9
                    Percent                                            20.5           6.8            17.9           34.2              3.4             7.7
                    Impact Factors/                                    5.9            14.9           11.4            0.4             11.0             21.7
                    Publication
                    * Impact was calculated by averaging the 2001 Institute for Scientific Information [ISI] impact ranking of journals in which a given country’s
                      research was published. The analysis is based on publications listed in the US National Library of Medicine as of July 30, 2003. Journals for
                      which the ISI has no impact factor ranking, such as Chinese language publications and the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report [MMWR] and
                      the Canada Diseases Weekly Report [CDWR] were given an impact factor of 0.001 in calculating means.



                  10B. Outbreak Investigations                                                 resources or expertise. Functionally in Canada, each
                                                                                               phase had and has different mechanisms for leadership,
                       and Research                                                            direction, organization, and funding. Some aspects of
                                                                                               research are required for emergency response, while
S A R S




                  Chapter 5 outlined how outbreak investigations and                           others are better suited to answering longer-term
                  research interconnect. The research response to an                           questions of equal import but less urgency.
                  epidemic such as SARS has several phases, including the
                  identification, characterization, response, monitoring                       In the identification phase the questions are: What are
                  and post-event phases. Ideally clinical, epidemiologic,
f r o m




                                                                                               the manifestations of infection? What is causing the
                  laboratory and social science research tools are used in an                  outbreak or epidemic? How is the causative agent
                  integrated and coordinated fashion in each phase. These                      transmitted? When does transmission occur? The cause
                  phases are not entirely sequential. Each phase of the                        of any epidemic is not known when cases first begin
                  research response brings different questions and thus the
L e a r n i n g




                                                                                               occurring. An epidemic caused by a known agent usually
                  required research response may be different in terms of                      requires, in the initial identification phase, competent



                  186          .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

public health laboratories to test for known agents, in         Some caused adverse effects without any benefit.
addition to epidemiologic and clinical research resources.      For example, during SARS there was a laudable attempt
An epidemic caused by a new agent, such as SARS, requires       to conduct an emergency clinical trial of ribavirin.
more robust laboratory research capacity. The SARS              However, before this could be mobilized, ribavirin became
coronavirus was identified quickly with traditional tech-       the “standard of care” for SARS and a trial was no longer
nology. Advanced proteomics, genomic and genetic                thought to be “ethical”. Unfortunately, ribavirin use in
technologies were employed after identification to charac-      SARS patients had a high rate of adverse events. Later in
terize the agent; such technologies may have been needed        vitro research showed no activity of the drug on the
in the first instance to identify a more fastidious organism.   SARS coronavirus. The suspension of elective services in
Fortunately, these capacities were in place and opera-          hospitals and quarantining of thousands of individuals,
tional well before an event such as SARS: Canada has            as occurred in Ontario, had obvious adverse impacts.
considerable strengths in multiple academic centres in
genomics and proteomics, and the National Microbiology          All these decisions were made in the face of crisis condi-
Laboratory [NML] fulfilled its function appropriately as a      tions and the pressing need to contain a serious outbreak.
national reference laboratory. These responses also             Careful evaluation of the effectiveness of the relevant
depended on existing collaborative relationships. For the       public health and clinical measures should not imply any
future, Canada should develop and sustain a strong              adverse verdict on the judgement of those who used
national network of fundamental and applied scientists          them. Science progresses by turning today’s truths into
capable of rapid research responses to the next outbreak        tomorrow’s mistakes. Evaluation in hindsight is always
of a novel infectious agent within our borders.                 easier than decision making under duress. But that is all
                                                                the more reason why evaluation should occur to inform
In the characterization phase, research turns to the            future decision making. It needs to be conducted now,
development of diagnostic tests, determining the spectrum       so that potential future epidemics can be dealt with using
of disease, assessing the extent of infection, and delin-       interventions with the least unintended negative effects.
eating the mechanisms of disease pathogenesis. We now
have effective diagnostic tools in Canada. Indeed, multiple     Finally, passenger screening was implemented at substantial
sites have been active in developing and enhancing              cost to the public health system and travel advisories were
SARS-specific diagnostic technologies. However, the             issued with severe economic effects. In the end, were
Canadian research response has yet to generate meaningful       there any positive health effects from these measures?
data on the spectrum of disease, the extent of infection,       We need to know their impact with certainty and
and understanding of mechanisms of disease pathogenesis.        communicate the results.
The international public health community was looking




                                                                                                                              C a n a d a
to Canada for answers to questions of global significance,      Monitoring the effectiveness of response through enhanced
and our response was inadequate.                                surveillance becomes important as an outbreak comes
                                                                under control. This is the phase of research we are in now.
Bringing an epidemic under control requires effective           As already noted, enhanced surveillance will be extremely
public health and clinical action. Research on the              important nationally and for other jurisdictions in the




                                                                                                                              i n
response to an epidemic is important to understanding           northern hemisphere as we enter the next respiratory
the effectiveness of interventions and refining or              virus season.
abandoning them. The interventions used in the


                                                                                                                              H e a l t h
response to SARS—antiviral treatment, quarantine and            Once an epidemic is over, various types of post-event
isolation, suspension and redirection of hospital activity,     research can be undertaken. The biomedical, clinical,
travel advisories, screening of travelers—all were              epidemiologic and public health research activities initi-
employed empirically. Adverse effects ranged from direct        ated during the initial phases of outbreak response must
drug toxicity for patients treated with antiviral drugs, to     be moved to completion. For SARS, there is a continuing
                                                                                                                              P u b l i c



loss of income and psychosocial consequences for those          need for more long-term fundamental research into the
in quarantine. At a macro-level, the consequences               basic biology of the virus, with a view to designing more
ranged from modest inconveniences (longer airport line-         effective therapies and developing a vaccine. “Lessons-
ups) to very serious health threats (delayed health services)   learned exercises” are another type of evaluative research
for hundreds of thousands. There were also national             focused on system improvement. This report is an
                                                                                                                              o f




economic impacts that affected millions of Canadians.           example of one such exercise. Parallel work for Ontario
There were and still are few data on which to base
                                                                                                                              R e n e w a l




judgements about the relative benefits of any of these
interventions.


..........................................................................................                            187
                  .................................................................................................

                  is underway with the Walker Panel and Campbell                   In short, strong leadership by excellent scientists, coupled
                  Investigation; an expert panel chaired by Prof. Sian Griffiths   with internal and external informal peer discussions of
                  and Sir Cyril Chantler of the UK is similarly providing a        experiments and findings, can ensure that emergency
                  third-party assessment of the SARS outbreak response in          work remains high quality.
                  Hong Kong.
                                                                                   10C.2 Mobilization of Scientific Resources
                  Assessing the long-term sequelae of SARS and its overall
                  health impacts are some of the other types of research           In order for scientific resources to be mobilized, they
                  that are required. Many questions remain unanswered.             need to exist and be organized in a fashion that permits
                  Do patients affected with SARS all recover full respiratory      rapid (less than a day) deployment. Canada needs a
                  function? How many patients and health care workers              cadre of cutting-edge scientists in the public health,
                  suffered lasting psychosocial harms? What exactly was            clinical, and biological spheres of infectious diseases, who
                  the economic impact of SARS on institutions and the              can and will drop everything on short notice and apply
                  various segments of the Canadian economy? In this post           their skills to the solution of the health threat at hand.
                  hoc phase of research, more usual research processes may         To be cutting-edge and prepared, they must be actively
                  be appropriate.                                                  engaged in research and part of the overall Canadian
                                                                                   research community on a continuing basis.

                  10C. Reflections on the Research                                 This in part is a key role for government science. Strategic
                       Response to Epidemics                                       investments in government public health science
                                                                                   capacity—such as the NML and the BC CDC—were
                  10C.1 Business as Usual                                          important factors in Canada’s ability to respond to SARS.
                                                                                   However, networks based in academe and the private
                  Canada has generally produced research on emerging               sector are also needed to broaden and deepen our
                  infectious diseases through the academic model. That is,         response capacity. These research networks cannot be
                  research is initiated and carried out by one or a few            about subsidizing ”business as usual”, or providing
                  investigators who have an interest in a question; it is          retainers to purchase the goodwill of a set of academics
                  funded through peer review, and communicated through             in hopes that they may elect to help out in a national
                  peer-reviewed channels. These normal processes for               emergency. Funds should flow to build specific capacities
                  planning, approving, funding, conducting, analyzing and          and establish delineated obligations—such an apparatus
                  communicating research are ill-suited to meet the early          must be established in advance with clear ground rules.
                  research needs of an epidemic response. Changes must             Hospitals and universities are useful partners, but the
                  be made during an epidemic investigation, just as changes        primary connections must be with individual scientists
                  in the health system’s hierarchical structures must be           who want to be part of a research response team.
                  made for effective outbreak management.                          Furthermore, epidemic research needs to be organized so
                                                                                   that it can react in any or several areas of the country at
                  Peer review, of course, remains the overall gold standard        a given time, and provision must also be made for
                  for what science is performed and where it is published          urgently mobilizing scientific resources from outside the
                  (and thus noticed). Peer review has its failings and critics;    health sector.
                  however, to paraphrase a similar tag about democracy, it
                  is the worst system for assessing science—except all the         The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC],
                  others. The basis for this system is to ensure that the          for example, co-opted US coronavirus experts shortly
                  highest quality, most important research is performed            after the virus was linked to SARS. Similarly, in the
                  and that it is verified by other scientists. During an           laboratory investigation of SARS, the NML linked to
S A R S




                  epidemic, the necessity of timely response means that            academic institutions, provincial agencies and the private
                  formal peer review is not practicable. This does not             sector. This resulted in the first full-length genome
                  mean that quality should be sacrificed. High quality             sequencing of the SARS coronavirus by a collaborative
                  science in the course of an epidemic can be assured by           team from the Michael Smith Genome Sciences Center,
f r o m




                  having teams of scientists who are normally full partici-        the BC CDC, and the NML. Government investment in
                  pants in the peer-reviewed processes—competitive granting        basic science capacity over the last several years created
                  and publishing in peer-reviewed journals—in place to             research strength that could be drawn into action.
                  respond to emergency research needs. Furthermore, this           However, the timely assembly of such collaborations can
L e a r n i n g




                  team must have processes for dynamic interchange and             only occur if there is already a degree of connectedness,
                  critical evaluation of each other’s ideas on a rapid timeline.



                  188       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

trust and scientific respect. The middle of an epidemic is     Connections between the academic sectors in epidemiology
not the time to be establishing new linkages and               and public health and local, provincial and national
collaborations.                                                counterparts have in some cases been eroded. The expiry
                                                               of initiatives such as Public Health Research Education
Overall, the SARS experience argues that capacity for          and Development [PHRED] in Ontario has resulted in the
cutting-edge science in government is needed, and it           collapse of teaching public health units. As a result, in
needs to be fully connected to and integrated with             Toronto during the height of the epidemic, the academic
academic and private sectors through interchanges, joint       public health sector was not drawn into needed epidemic
appointments, collaborations and formal and informal           research, and as yet has produced very little research in
networks. Fostering these linkages should be an integral       these areas. To pick up a theme from Chapter 7, public
part of the workplan for a new Canadian Agency for             health units and public health practitioners in major
Public Health and the F/P/T Network for Communicable           centres need to be integrated into the academic sector
Disease Control. The network should give special               in much the same way that teaching hospitals partner
priority to linking research in government and academic        with universities and community colleges. The cross-
institutions with a focus on infectious diseases, thereby      fertilization will improve training opportunities, create
building the teams and business processes for rapid            more varied and attractive career paths, build a strong
epidemic investigation that will strengthen Canada’s           research culture in public health, and facilitate the rapid
ability to respond to the ‘next SARS’.                         emergence of teams of investigators who can participate
                                                               in epidemic investigation.
While some aspects of laboratory research on SARS in
Canada were a source of national pride, we have already        In the latter stages of the SARS outbreak, large research
outlined that more could have been done. Reports on            coalitions did begin to emerge in Canada. These include
interim laboratory results were not produced and communi-      the SARS Research Network in Toronto and the SARS
cated as often as they could have been. Effective linkage      Accelerated Vaccine Initiative in British Columbia. The
of laboratory research at the national level to the clinical   Canadian SARS Research Consortium was initiated in late
and epidemiologic research efforts at the provincial and       May 2003 to “coordinate, promote and support SARS
local level never really happened. Academic linkages           research in Canada and develop international linkages
tended to be geographically limited.                           and partnerships to control and eradicate SARS.” The
                                                               consortium was catalyzed by the Canadian Institutes of
Mobilization of epidemiologic and public health research       Health Research [CIHR] to deal with the immediate threat
was particularly weak. As noted earlier, the research          posed by SARS. If it proves successful, the Canadian SARS
capacity in provincial public health agencies varies, but      Research Consortium could become a model and evolve




                                                                                                                              C a n a d a
with some exceptions, is very limited. Indeed, little          into a more permanent structure to address newly emerging
scientific capacity exists in most local and provincial        infectious diseases in Canada. The funding partners
agencies. The Committee sees an acute need for stronger        include the CIHR, Genome Canada, Health Canada,
academic linkages and in-house research capacity for           GlaxoSmithKline, the Michael Smith Foundation for
public health agencies at the provincial/territorial level     Health Research, the Ontario Research & Development




                                                                                                                              i n
and in major municipalities. Supporting such linkages          Challenge Fund [ORDCF], Fonds de la recherche en santé
and capacity should be a funding priority in the transfer      du Quebéc [FRSQ], the Protein Engineering Network of
programs from the Canadian Agency for Public Health.           Centres of Excellence [PENCE], and CANVAC (the


                                                                                                                              H e a l t h
                                                               Canadian Network for Vaccines and Immunotherapeutics).
Health Canada’s capacity in these areas is also limited.       The Consortium intends to work in diverse areas, such as
The Centre for Infectious Disease Prevention and Control,      diagnostics, vaccine development, therapeutics, epidemi-
the main part of the Population and Public Health              ology, databases, public health and community impact.
Branch responsible for surveillance and epidemiologic
                                                                                                                              P u b l i c



research on infectious disease, employs only 12 medical        10C.3 Leadership, Organization, and
epidemiologists and public health practitioners and 9 PhD            Direction of Research
epidemiologists. Their research productivity varies in
part because of competing demands on their time, and           The usual consensus-building processes for scientific
in part because the current structures do not lend them-       collaboration are difficult to follow in the face of an out-
                                                                                                                              o f




selves to academic partnerships.                               break and the required research response. Furthermore,
                                                               assuming that F/P/T public health research capacity is
                                                                                                                              R e n e w a l




                                                               created within public agencies and institutions, jurisdic-
                                                               tional tensions could still emerge and impede the research


..........................................................................................                            189
                  .................................................................................................

                  response to the next major outbreak. These concerns            Those normal scientific processes involve redundancy,
                  suggest the need for clarity about scientific and research     repetition and uncoordinated replication, and competition.
                  leadership in epidemic research responses.                     These processes, with their centripetal tendencies and
                                                                                 creative anarchy, have paid huge dividends for society.
                  This is not a straightforward matter. Researchers are not      However, they are too slow, unpredictable, and expensive
                  often skilled in management. Moreover, management              for outbreak research. This underscores the need, outlined
                  skills are necessary but not sufficient for the discharge of   earlier, for two synergistic elements in the research response:
                  a leadership role in a crisis. Attempted research leadership   a strong scientific presence in publicly-managed
                  also sometimes runs afoul of research ‘followership’,          and -accountable institutions, and funds flowing through
                  i.e., researchers resist being organized and steered at the    structures that draw non-governmental partners into a
                  best of times. They have a healthy scepticism about            network with a clear set of research responsibilities.
                  authority, and highly-specialized expertise that is unlikely
                  to be matched by a particular leader. Leadership of a          For example, in the early stages of the SARS outbreak,
                  scientific team accordingly derives from competence,           laboratory research was relatively well-coordinated
                  respect, interpersonal and communication skills, and           because it was centralized. As the health care and academic
                  mutual trust as much as it does from the authority given       sectors became engaged and testing for the coronavirus
                  to someone in a particular position. This is doubly so         became more widely available, laboratory activity became
                  when the scientific team is a network of individuals           more fragmented. The ability to track laboratory results
                  outside a hierarchical organization, in which participants     disappeared. Central data management was not maintained.
                  have the latitude to choose their collaborators and their      Indeed, although many stakeholders called for action, it
                  research foci. Furthermore, decisions need to be made in       was not clear who, if anyone, had the authority to insist
                  a timeframe that may not allow consensus building.             on better coordination of data management.

                  During the SARS epidemic, effective overall leadership on      The epidemiologic, clinical, public health and social science
                  research was lacking, particularly in the epidemiology         research efforts were even more fragmented. Health Canada
                  and public health sphere. Multiple public health units         attempted to direct some of the epidemiologic and public
                  were involved but coordination was limited and staff were      health research by developing research protocols and
                  consumed with fighting the outbreak. The provincial            providing funding and direct support. However, progress
                  public health branch did not have sufficient in-house          has been frustratingly slow. The CIHR demonstrated
                  research capacity or highly-developed academic linkages.       substantial agility and provided some welcome leadership
                  As noted in Chapter 2, scientific firepower was marshalled     through a special SARS competition, in May. However,
                  in an advisory committee to support the executive team         some of the individuals who were best placed to address
                  that oversaw the provincial emergency in Ontario, but          the central questions were already deeply engaged in
                  this group did not have the time, data, or clear mandate       fighting the outbreak and hardly in a position to write
                  to coordinate the relevant epidemic research. In future,       elegant grant applications. An accelerated granting
                  research leadership for outbreak investigation must be         competition may be worthwhile for slower-moving out-
                  determined well in advance, along with a tentative set of      breaks or for rapid post-event research, but was criticized
                  managerial structures to move a research agenda forward.       by a number of informants as misplaced in the midst of
                                                                                 continuing efforts to contain a fast-moving outbreak
                  One such structure, as noted earlier, is the creation of a     such as SARS.
                  connection between the outbreak management team and
                  the research response team—a B-Team as pioneered by            Some mechanism for ongoing coordination of SARS
                  the CDC. This would be a group whose task it was to            research is still needed, as pressing questions remain
                  think critically about the scientific questions, generate      unanswered. The Canadian SARS Research Consortium
S A R S




                  ideas for research, and offer sober second thoughts on         and the SARS Accelerated Vaccine Initiative are two
                  the overall direction of an outbreak response.                 examples of efforts to coordinate the research effort.
                                                                                 However, these coordinating bodies are operating under
                  More generally, the research structures themselves need        no particular authority, and a wide range of other activity
f r o m




                  not mirror the command-and-control apparatus needed            is now underway without formal cross-linkages, networking,
                  for effective management of the outbreak per se; but they      or coordination. Research on the development of diag-
                  will be more hierarchical than normal in research. Put         nostic tests is illustrative. Diagnostic research can only
                  another way, the scientific team must have a quarterback       be done if there is access to clinical specimens. These are
L e a r n i n g




                  and a play book that all will use, albeit temporarily until    only available in any quantity in a few institutions that
                  post-event research brings the more free-flowing processes
                  of normal science on stream.

                  190       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

may or may not be interested and willing to provide                             investigations somewhat differently than planned research
them to researchers. The amount of material is limited                          activity with respect to some of these ethical issues.
so that not every demand for material can be met.                               More thinking about the ethical and legal dimensions of
                                                                                public health research and outbreak investigation is
There are also serious organizational and ethical issues in                     needed. The rights of the individual must be balanced
how diagnostic specimens can be drawn into a coordinated                        against the public good of disease surveillance and epidemic
research effort. Some researchers have suggested that                           research that will safeguard the population’s health.
Canada create a national SARS database to facilitate
research, pulling together relevant clinical, epidemiologic,                    In sum, for future emerging infectious disease threats,
laboratory, and, where applicable, pathological data.                           some process for coordinating the research effort nationally
This would be novel and ideal. However, individual                              needs to be in place. A restructured national public health
researchers do not have control over data that accumulate                       system should have this role, along with the authorities
during the response to an outbreak. The data are now                            to direct and coordinate research, establish national
held in many different institutions and agencies; they are                      databases and research platforms, ensure that appropriate
subject to constraints of confidentiality arising from their                    ethical and privacy safeguards are in place, and provide
acquisition as part of a local public health investigation                      resources to fund epidemic response research.
or clinical encounter.
                                                                                10C.4 Funding
As well, in usual circumstances, those who generate data
“own” the data and decide what is to be done with them.                         We have already seen that the usual peer-reviewed
These researchers are under no obligation, except perhaps                       mechanisms for funding research are not suited to the
a moral one, to make data available to others who may                           immediate initial phases of epidemic research. Certain
be able to use it better. The same applies to biologic                          research activities must be carried out regardless of flaws
materials. These practices must change during provincial                        in study design. An outbreak is not the time to allow
and national emergencies, and perhaps more generally.                           “the best to become the enemy of the good”; a response
                                                                                must occur. The initial funding for research conducted
Thus, a fundamental question that Canada needs to                               on SARS was not peer-reviewed in the formal sense and
answer is: Who “owns” the various streams of precious                           was provided entirely by affected health care institutions
scientific data that emerge during an outbreak? During                          or directly by governments. The quality of the work
the Health Canada SARS conference in Toronto on                                 was ensured by pre-existing capacity and networks of
April 30/May 1, 2003, it was suggested that the idea of                         scientists who provided real-time informal peer review.
“ownership” of data during an outbreak should be                                Subsequently, the peer-reviewed granting agencies




                                                                                                                                                            C a n a d a
permanently replaced by “stewardship”. Operationalizing                         responded to SARS research needs and began funding
this idea will be challenging, but is worthy of pursuit.                        SARS research in a relatively rapid timeframe. However,
                                                                                at this point we have largely lost the ability to perform
As a corollary, how can the confidentiality of the affected                     clinical research on the pathogenesis of SARS.1
patients and their contacts be safeguarded in any data
                                                                                It appears that the CIHR was able to hold an accelerated




                                                                                                                                                            i n
amalgamation process? Some informants believe that
confidentiality and privacy concerns can be readily man-                        competition in part because of a quirk in their finances
aged by having each group or institution in a data steward-                     for fiscal year 2003-2004. The CIHR and other agencies


                                                                                                                                                            H e a l t h
ship consortium agree on a protocol for “anonymizing”                           need to have the capacity to respond to new threats
the data, and then using common non-nominal identi-                             rapidly through the creation of special funding envelopes.
fiers to create the means for linking data from multiple                        It is surprising that the Canadian Food Inspection Agency
sources. On the other hand, we noted in Chapter 9 that                          [CFIA], as an agency with a legislative mandate similar to
the Privacy Act and The Personal Information Protection and                     the CIHR, is able to roll funds over on a 24-month basis
                                                                                                                                                            P u b l i c



Electronic Documents Act and related provincial laws are                        while the CIHR is not. Extending this administrative
not well suited to disease surveillance, outbreak investi-                      policy to CIHR would clearly improve the CIHR’s
gation, and applied research in the face of infectious                          flexibility in responding to emerging infectious diseases
diseases. In this regard, an epidemic caused by a new                           and other fast-breaking research issues.
agent presents some unique issues. In broad brushstrokes,
                                                                                                                                                            o f




the US approach has been to consider public health
                                                                                                                                                            R e n e w a l




1 It is arguable that, funding aside, pathogenetic research was impeded by a dearth of clinician scientists and the pressures they were under in fighting
  the outbreak.



..........................................................................................                                                          191
                  .................................................................................................

                  Canada’s investment in infectious disease research and                      had huge direct and indirect costs, and probably affected
                  special funding for SARS is detailed in Table 3. To date,                   national economic indices. It is especially small when one
                  the Government of Canada has invested or committed                          considers that $20 million have been allocated for adver-
                  about $6.7 million (Health Canada has spent about                           tising campaigns to enhance tourism in Ontario post-SARS.
                  $2 million on research, the CIHR has announced or held
                  competitions for $2.7 million and the Minister of Health                    In recognition of the unusual nature of SARS and the
                  has reallocated $2 million for SARS research to the NML)                    importance of research, some novel funding initiatives
                  on SARS research. This does not account for what has                        have developed. British Columbia’s SARS Accelerated
                  been spent directly by health institutions and provincial                   Vaccine Initiative has made $2.6 million available for
                  governments in responding to SARS. The investment                           SARS vaccine development. The Ontario Research and
                  seems small in relation to a problem that infected more                     Development Challenge Fund announced $10 million to
                  than 400 people, killed 44, resulted in thousands in                        create an Ontario infectious diseases network. Part of the
                  quarantine, shut down the health care system in Toronto,                    funding will be to match the support for Ontario-based
                                                                                              scientists who are successful in obtaining CIHR funds for
                                                                                              SARS research.
                    T   A B L E           3
                                                                                              All these initiatives are commendable, but the capacity
                    Canadian Spending On Infectious Diseases Research
                                                                                              of the research community to respond is limited. The
                    and SARS Research To Date
                                                                                              creation of scientific capacity is a long-term process.
                                              All Infectious   Special Allocations            It involves coordination of support across post-secondary
                                                Diseases           for SARS                   institutions, granting councils, and the health charities,
                                              (C$ millions)      (C$ millions)                together with an ongoing demand for highly-skilled
                                                                                              personnel and a career path that makes a particular field
                    CIHR2                         71.5                  2.7
                                                                                              attractive. Furthermore, as the Canadian Veterinary Medical
                    NSERC                          2.8                                        Association [CVMA] highlighted, capacity-building
                    Genome    Canada3                                                         investments must be extended in new directions. Given
                                                                                              the importance of zoonoses, the CVMA questions why
                    Canada Foundation              24                                         “virtually nothing” is spent to predict which diseases in
                    for Innovation                                                            animal populations may jump to human communities,
                    Networks of Centers                                                       and to prevent such cross-species transmission. This
                    of Excellence4                                                            capacity-building must involve the private sector as well
                                                                                              as the public sector. For example, Canada’s Research-
                    Health Canada –                13                    3
                    National Microbiology                                                     based Pharmaceutical Companies suggest that industry is
                    Laboratory (internal                                                      prepared to invest not only in biomedical investigation
                    and external funding)                                                     but broader health research, including social sciences.

                    Health Canada – Center          5                    1
                                                                                              In sum, targeted competitions on a short timeline will
                    for Infectious Disease
                                                                                              simply flow more money to already-overloaded investi-
                    Prevention and Control
                    (internal and external                                                    gators or subsidize second-rate research unless a mature
                    funding)                                                                  scientific community with appropriate breadth and depth
                                                                                              exists and is ready to respond to requests for proposals.
                    Health Canada –                 5                                         A careful balance must be struck across three areas of
                    Laboratory for Food
                                                                                              funding: open competitions to support investigator-driven
                    Borne Zoonoses (internal
                                                                                              science; targeted competitions that seek to support, prefer-
S A R S




                    and external funding)
                                                                                              entially, work in specific areas; and mission-oriented
                    Provincial                 Unavailable              12                    research with a strongly applied focus (as occurs during
                    Governments                                                               outbreak investigation).
                    Total                         120+                 17.7
f r o m




                  2 CIHR submission to the National Advisory Committee on SARS and Public Health, July 28, 2003.
                  3 Genome Canada currently has a competition for applied genomics in health which will invest in infectious diseases.
L e a r n i n g




                  4 Two networks are funded, the Canadian Bacterial Diseases Network [CBDN] and the Canadian Network for Vaccines and Immunotherapeutics. CBDN
                    funding as a National Centre of Excellence [NCE] is coming to an end. Two NCEs, the Protein Engineering Network of Centres of Excellence [PENCE]
                    and the Mathematics of Information Technology and Complex Systems [MITACS] have funded SARS research projects.



                  192        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


10C.5 Communications                                                       on conference calls. From the Health Canada perspective,
                                                                           since the relevant individuals from the most affected areas
Scientific communication changes substantially in epidemic                 were stretched so thinly that they were too busy to partici-
situations and is fundamentally different from normal                      pate, this led to the Kafkaesque situation where calls
processes and procedures. Public communications issues                     involved discussion among regions that were unaffected.
were detailed in Chapter 5. This section considers communi-                Consideration needs to be given to how to improve the
cation of scientific information within the scientific                     efficiency of communication during emergency response,
community, to public health officials, and to the media.                   starting with the creation of adequate local and regional
                                                                           activity so that communications can be sustained while
In a non-epidemic situation, research is communicated                      the response to an outbreak is underway.
through peer-reviewed channels—scientific conferences
and scientific journals. This process is slow, but valuable                Formal publication of results also changed during SARS.
because it serves to validate results. Communications                      Researchers had the unusual experience of finding that
with the public happens in most instances after some                       editors of the most respected journals were lobbying for
form of peer review and communication to other scientists.                 submissions and offering turn around in a matter of days
During the SARS epidemic, communications among                             for review and publication of electronic papers. Trends
laboratory scientists nationally and internationally were                  toward rapid e-publication that were already in the offing
effective and efficient through the use of international                   may have been accelerated by SARS.
conference calls and the Internet. An important innovation
was the impromptu network of laboratories and supporting                   During an epidemic, research is conducted in a fishbowl.
web page rapidly put in place by WHO. This resulted                        This meant that during the SARS epidemic, preliminary
in a very early exchange of ideas, results, reagents and                   scientific results were widely reported in the press more
protocols and significantly speeded up identification of                   or less as the findings were produced. This resulted in
the coronavirus and confirmation of its link to SARS.                      considerable pressure on Canadian scientists, and shaped
The framework for international communication and                          scientific communications in subtle ways. For example,
collaboration came together in less than two weeks.                        modest and reasoned differences in viewpoints among
This successful process should be studied, codified,                       experts concerning causative agents appeared to be black-
strengthened, and replicated wherever necessary.                           and-white disagreements when selected sound-bites were
                                                                           aired or quotes chosen for use by print media. Honest
Nationally, communication of laboratory results was facili-                differences should be shared with the public, but the
tated through dissemination of a summary of laboratory                     Committee perceives that there was clear scope for better
results from the NML. The frequency of production was                      coordination of how scientists communicated with




                                                                                                                                          C a n a d a
limited by a weak capacity for analysis at the NML. Other                  decision makers and the public.
limitations in communication involving laboratories were
outlined in Chapter 6. On balance, however, information
moved reasonably well.                                                     10D. Capacity for Relevant Public
                                                                                Health and Infectious Disease
The same cannot be said for communication about the




                                                                                                                                          i n
epidemiologic aspects of the science. Global epidemiology                       Research in Canada
and public health networks did not develop until much


                                                                                                                                          H e a l t h
                                                                           As one indicator of research spending on infectious
later in the epidemic. Nationally, although Health
                                                                           diseases, the CIHR now has an annualized commitment of
Canada made significant efforts to obtain and communicate
                                                                           $71.4 million to this broadly-defined field. This invest-
information on the epidemiology of SARS, shortcomings
                                                                           ment might be considered “over-invested”5 if viewed
in data management and analysis meant that very little
                                                                           solely with an eye to the relative burden of disease. The
in the way of epidemiologic information was generated
                                                                           problem, of course, is that the CIHR’s overall budget on a
                                                                                                                                          P u b l i c



to communicate. Thus, the issue may be more one of
                                                                           per capita basis continues to lag hugely behind the US
content than communication capacity.
                                                                           National Institutes of Health. Compared to the USA,
                                                                           spending by our national health research agency on infec-
As was true internationally, teleconference calls and the
                                                                           tious diseases represents a substantial under-investment,
Internet were the basic communication tools used
                                                                           and many other areas of health research have presumably
                                                                                                                                          o f




nationally by researchers. Teleconferences were effective
                                                                           fallen even further behind. The CIHR’s spending
but highly inefficient. Individuals who were key players
                                                                           includes 11 randomized controlled trials for a total of
                                                                                                                                          R e n e w a l




in the response at all levels spent many hours every day
                                                                           $3.88 million, and the HIV Clinical Trials Network for

5 CIHR submission to the National Advisory Committee on SARS and Public Health, July 28, 2003.


..........................................................................................                                        193
                  .................................................................................................

                  $4.2 million; 527 operating grants for $52.6 million;                      overall research capacity in provincial public health is
                  91 career awards for $5.56 million; and 181 individual                     limited. Ontario has seen a decline in the number of
                  training awards for graduate students and post-doctoral                    laboratory scientists in its provincial laboratory; analytical
                  fellows for a total of $4.30 million. As an example of under-              capacity in the provincial public health branch was
                  investment in infectious diseases research, the CIHR                       notably limited during SARS. British Columbia, Alberta
                  currently has no funded projects on West Nile disease.                     and Quebec have strength in some areas, but no other
                                                                                             provinces have internationally-competitive laboratory
                  Epidemiologic and public health research on infectious                     research capacity in the public health realm.
                  diseases is considerably under-invested. “CIHR’s invest-
                  ment in infectious disease research flows primarily to                     The situation is worse in the epidemiologic and public
                  support biomedical research (84%), and the emphasis on                     health fields. The Committee’s assessment is that, with
                  biomedical research in this field is stronger than in the                  the possible exception of Quebec’s National Institute of
                  CIHR’s overall portfolio (72%).”6 Furthermore, there are                   Public Health, no province has broad public health
                  no specific CIHR investments in emerging infectious                        research capacity within its public sector. British Columbia
                  diseases, although the Institute of Immunology and                         has strength in specific areas through its Centre for
                  Infectious Diseases is planning a special initiative in this               Disease Control. Manitoba at one time had a productive
                  area. According to a brief inventory by the CIHR, “NSERC                   epidemiologic research unit but it has largely disintegrated
                  provides about $2.8 million in operating support per year                  owing to lack of targeted support. We detailed earlier the
                  in areas ranging from studies into fundamental biology of                  loss of Ontario’s PHRED program and the lack of linkages
                  pathogens, through to more applied studies of vaccines                     between health units and universities or community
                  and antimicrobials, agricultural practice, and food safety.                colleges. The same malaise that has led to profound
                  As well, “the Canadian Foundation for Innovation has                       shortages in human resources for public health has
                  invested close to $24 million in infrastructure and equip-                 undermined research capacity in the field.
                  ment in the area of infection and parasitic diseases.”
                  Two federally-funded networks of centres of excellence                     Recognizing the capacity issues, the CIHR has recently
                  are relevant: the Canadian Bacterial Diseases Network                      funded five new strategic training initiatives in infectious
                  and the Canadian Network of Vaccines and Immuno-                           diseases. This is a positive step, but CIHR’s record shows
                  therapeutics [CANVAC]. There is no network focused                         that its absolute increases in support for biomedical
                  on viral diseases. “Genome Canada has funded three                         science have meaningfully outstripped expansion across
                  large projects relevant to human infectious disease, on                    the other three “pillars” combined—those being clinical
                  Cryptococcus, Candida albicans, and viral proteomics.”                     investigation, health services research, and population
                                                                                             and public health research. This asymmetric growth in
                  Other relevant federal investments include the National                    CIHR spending is partly a capacity problem in areas other
                  Research Council’s Institute of Biodiagnostics located in                  than biomedical research, but also reflects the CIHR’s
                  Winnipeg and its Institute of Biological Sciences, located                 difficult mandate of meeting research needs for all
                  in Ottawa. The latter has developed an effective vaccine                   imaginable stakeholders. It is very unclear whether the
                  for Group C meningococcal disease.                                         separate CIHR Institutes can address the capacity for
                                                                                             public health research, particularly in epidemiology and
                  According to the CIHR, “A ballpark estimate for federal                    the social and behavioural sciences.
                  investment in infectious diseases research would be
                  $100 million per year. However, as in most other areas
                  of science, there is little coordination between agencies
                                                                                             10E. Recommendations
                  in how those funds are invested or in developing a                         Some aspects of the research response to SARS went
                  federal research agenda.”
S A R S




                                                                                             exceedingly well in Canada; other aspects did not. The
                                                                                             reasons for these failings can be summarized briefly as
                  We have noted above that essential capacity for leading                    follows. Governments have not consistently recognized
                  and performing the needed research in response to an                       that research is a core public health function, and
                  epidemic must reside in government-funded public                           supported it. Canada’s considerable new investment in
f r o m




                  health institutions. How robust is the capacity for this                   research has not adequately targeted public health and
                  type of research in public health institutions? The                        epidemiologic research, nor has there been substantial
                  Committee perceives that, with a few exceptions, the                       thinking about creative partnerships and programs to
L e a r n i n g




                  6 CIHR submission to the National Advisory Committee on SARS and Public Health, July 28, 2003.



                  194        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

build public health research capacity. Furthermore,            many would be initiated in collaboration with academic
support for clinician scientists has been limited. Canadian    partners, provinces and territories, major municipal health
research structures and procedures are not designed for the    units, and research agencies, particularly the CIHR.
type of research response that is required in an epidemic.
The actual capacity for key types of research in public        10.2 The Canadian Agency for Public Health, in
health institutions has been constrained by: the weak               partnership with provincial and territorial
research and evaluation culture in multiple levels of               governments and through the F/P/T Network
governments; limited career paths for public health prac-           for Communicable Disease Control, should
titioners in various disciplines at the federal, provincial,        directly invest in provincial, territorial, and
and local levels; a lack of programs and opportunities to           regional public health science capacity.
prepare personnel from multiple disciplines for public
                                                               The $100 million earmarked for ‘second-line’ capacity,
health research in general and investigation of emerging
                                                               including the operation of the F/P/T Network for
infectious diseases in particular; and pressure on existing
                                                               Communicable Disease Control, is the logical source of
personnel such that research and evaluation activities, if
                                                               funding for this purpose. Options include directed
funded at all, must be squeezed in between other pressing
                                                               funding flows to existing provincial/territorial bodies or
work demands. Finally, there are no mechanisms for
                                                               the creation of joint F/P/T regional institutes. The
national leadership, coordination and direction of
                                                               mandate of these bodies would be to provide public
epidemic research.
                                                               health research services to the provinces and territories.
To prepare for future SARS outbreaks, which could be as
                                                               10.3 The F/P/T Network for Communicable Disease
close as the next respiratory virus season, Canada needs
                                                                    Control, in partnership with the CIHR and the
to take stock and complete some important SARS-related
                                                                    Canadian research community, should develop
research projects as quickly as possible. We also need to
                                                                    clear protocols for leadership and coordination
make longer-term changes. Although SARS was only a
                                                                    of future epidemic research responses.
moderate-sized outbreak, it highlighted a number of
deficiencies in our research response that could have          10.4 The Canadian Agency for Public Health and
been extraordinarily damaging had the agent been even               the F/P/T Network for Communicable Disease
more infectious or dangerous. We now have the oppor-                Control should ensure that epidemic response
tunity—indeed, an obligation—to address the structural,             teams initiated as part of the Health Emergency
procedural and capacity issues that prevented a more                Response Team [HERT] concept, provide not
effective research response to SARS in this nation.                 only surge capacity for outbreak containment
                                                                    per se, but also a mobile “B-team” and investi-




                                                                                                                             C a n a d a
The Committee accordingly recommends that:                          gative infrastructure, including epidemiologists,
                                                                    programmers, and analysts.
10.1 The Canadian Agency for Public Health should
                                                               10.5 The Canadian Agency for Public Health, in
     earmark substantial funding to augment
                                                                    partnership with provincial/territorial govern-
     national capacity for research into epidemio-
                                                                    ments, should develop clear rules, reinforced




                                                                                                                             i n
     logic and laboratory aspects of emerging
                                                                    by intergovernmental agreements, on the
     infectious diseases and other threats to popu-
                                                                    sharing of information, the establishment of
     lation health. This enhanced national public


                                                                                                                             H e a l t h
                                                                    national databases, and the use of biologic
     health science capacity should be strongly
                                                                    materials for research in response to epidemics.
     linked to academic health institutions through
     co-location, joint venture research institutes,           10.6 The Canadian Agency for Public Health, in
     cross appointments, joint recruitment, inter-                  collaboration with the CIHR, should establish
     change, networks and collaborative research                    a task force on emerging infectious diseases to
                                                                                                                             P u b l i c



     activities.                                                    recommend research priorities and funding
                                                                    mechanisms. The Agency, in collaboration
To this end, in the notional core budget for the Canadian
                                                                    with the CIHR and other national research
Agency for Public Health outlined in Chapter 3, we
                                                                    funding bodies, should support the development
foresaw new spending rising to $50 million per annum
                                                                    of special funding mechanisms and processes
on infectious disease capacity, including research elements,
                                                                                                                             o f




                                                                    for fast-tracking research related to epidemics
and another $25 million in general public health R&D
                                                                    of infectious diseases.
functions. Some of these activities would be in-house;
                                                                                                                             R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                            195
                  .................................................................................................

                  10.7 The Canadian Agency for Public Health, in
                       partnership with research agencies and
                       provincial/territorial governments, should
                       work with universities to improve research
                       training opportunities in infectious diseases
                       and outbreak management for the full range
                       of involved disciplines. This capacity-building
                       focus should be a priority within the broader
                       health human resource strategy of the Agency
                       (see Chapter 7).
                  10.8 The Government of Canada should strengthen
                       its R&D functions in international health
                       outreach, with particular emphasis on emerging
                       infectious diseases on a global basis.
                  In this respect, as suggested in the brief discussion of
                  ethics in Chapter 9, the Committee believes that Canada
                  has an obligation to be more engaged in outreach
                  activities that will help build research capacity in less
                  developed nations. These investments should have
                  positive long-term impacts on the health of populations
                  in those nations, and thereby complement conventional
                  forms of assistance provided by the Canadian
                  International Development Agency and other agencies.
                  We return to this issue in Chapter 11.

                  10.9 The Government of Canada should foster
                       workable public-private partnerships with the
                       biotechnology, information technology, and
                       pharmaceutical industries for shared research
                       interests in the realm of emerging infectious
                       diseases, including new vaccines, antiviral
                       compounds, immunotherapies, and diagnostic
                       technology.
                  10.10 The Canadian Agency for Public Health
                        should spearhead discussions on the issues of
                        intellectual property, copyright and patenting
                        from public health inventions.
S A R S
f r o m
L e a r n i n g




                  196      .........................................................................................
                            SARS and Public Health
Chapter 11



VIRUSES WITHOUT BORDERS:
International Aspects of SARS
.................................................................................................



The SARS outbreak illustrates Marshall McLuhan’s
prediction that the world would become a ‘global village’.
                                                               11A. International Background
It took smallpox centuries just to cross the Atlantic; a few   11A.1 Health Canada’s Role
weeks after arriving in Hong Kong from Guangdong, SARS
had already spread to 30 countries on five continents.             “National boundaries no longer offer isolation or
As of July 2003, the direct clinical toll of SARS was              protection from infectious diseases, toxic chemicals,
already about 8,500 probable SARS cases and more than              and hazardous products.”
800 deaths worldwide. The global economic and social
                                                                   —Lac Tremblant Declaration, 1994
toll has been nothing short of staggering.
                                                               As noted in Chapter 3, in 1992 the Institute of Medicine—
The story of SARS in Canada has had international
                                                               a division of the National Academies of Sciences in the
dimensions from the outset. In both Ontario and British
                                                               United States—released a report describing the growing
Columbia, SARS was imported by Canadians returning
                                                               concerns about the resurgence of infectious diseases.1
from Asia. Conversely, it appears that only three individ-
                                                               A little less than two years later, Health Canada’s Laboratory
uals developed SARS after leaving Canada, with onward
                                                               Centre for Disease Control convened a three-day meeting
transmission only by one person who went to the
                                                               at Lac Tremblant. Forty leading scientists gathered to
Philippines.




                                                                                                                                C a n a d a
                                                               discuss and debate the Institute of Medicine report and
                                                               consider its implications for Canada. Their conclusions
In this chapter we focus on three key international
                                                               were reflected in the “Lac Tremblant Declaration,” that
aspects of the SARS outbreak. First, we see again that
                                                               recommended the development of national strategies for
Canada must have the reporting systems, collaborative
                                                               the surveillance and control of new and resurgent
mechanisms, and resources in place for other members of
                                                               infectious diseases. These recommendations recognized
the family of nations to be satisfied that we can meet our




                                                                                                                                i n
                                                               the ongoing emergence of infectious diseases in Canada,
obligations to contain outbreaks. Second, SARS was the
                                                               such as Lyme Disease (1975), Legionnaires’ disease (1976),
first instance in which the World Health Organization


                                                                                                                                H e a l t h
                                                               HIV/AIDS (1981), E. coli O157:H7 (1983), hepatitis C
[WHO] issued travel advisories. Not only were the
                                                               (1989), and Hantavirus (1993).
evidentiary foundations for WHO intervention weak, but
there are more general concerns about the basis for and
                                                               Although some within the federal government accepted
effect of travel advisories, including Health Canada’s own
                                                               the pressing need for a national plan, the available
practices in this regard. Third, the federal government
                                                                                                                                P u b l i c


                                                               resources were insufficient to allow a comprehensive
needs to review its measures for disease screening and
                                                               approach. The Institute of Medicine report and the Lac
health-related support at ports of entry to Canada.
                                                               Tremblant meeting did contribute to the development of
Airport screening measures, in particular, appear to have
                                                               the Office of Special Health Initiatives, organized within
little yield.
                                                               the Laboratory Centre for Disease Control at Health
                                                               Canada. Focusing on global mobility and its implications
                                                                                                                                o f




                                                               for infectious disease spread, the Office of Special Health
                                                               Initiatives developed the Travel Medicine and Migration
                                                                                                                                R e n e w a l




                                                               Health programs and the Montebello Process, which



..........................................................................................                              197
                  .................................................................................................

                  offered advice to other government departments                                 Health Canada has close ties with the US Centers for
                  concerning screening of immigrants for infectious                              Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], and the two bodies
                  diseases. After a Health Canada reorganization in 2000,                        have engaged in many collaborative programs over the
                  these activities were incorporated into the new Centre for                     years. Health Canada plays an important role in inter-
                  Emergency Preparedness and Response.                                           national working groups, such as those that have recently
                                                                                                 been created to prepare for the possibility of deliberate
                  Through its membership in WHO, Canada accepted the                             transmission of infectious diseases (i.e., bioterrorism).
                  obligation to report nationally on only a few diseases                         The federal Minister of Health or one of her delegates
                  (e.g., plague, yellow fever and cholera). As noted in                          also represents Canada in other international forums—
                  Chapter 9, WHO has been updating its regulations and is                        the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, for
                  developing new standards for surveillance and control of                       example, recently hosted a meeting of health ministers
                  communicable disease. Even in the absence of such                              in Thailand to discuss SARS. Finally, to assist developing
                  international standards, however, multiple observers had                       countries, Canada provides technical advice and support
                  already identified a threat to the domestic control of                         through Health Canada and to a lesser extent, through
                  infectious diseases from the lack of a truly national surveil-                 the Canadian International Development Agency [CIDA].
                  lance and reporting system. SARS has now sharply illus-                        As noted in Chapter 10, except in HIV/AIDS, CIDA’s
                  trated the international realities that make it untenable                      health portfolio is modest and includes no involvement
                  for each province or territory to choose when and what                         in emerging infectious diseases. We believe that
                  infectious disease data to report to other jurisdictions,                      Canada’s international outreach on emerging infectious
                  including the federal government. Measures already                             diseases should be strengthened, thereby providing
                  recommended throughout this report should, if adopted,                         meaningful support to developing nations and unique
                  rapidly remedy this situation.                                                 learning opportunities for those preparing for careers in
                                                                                                 public health.
                  International Collaborations
                                                                                                 Other international collaborations that have developed
                  Collaboration among nations is beneficial to Canada in
                                                                                                 as a result of individual contacts and interests among
                  part by ensuring that the nation has intelligence on
                                                                                                 Health Canada staff include the Caribbean Epidemiology
                  emerging disease trends so that citizens and our health
                                                                                                 Centre, and joint surveillance of enteric pathogens in
                  systems can be informed and act accordingly. Health
                                                                                                 some Central and South American countries facilitated
                  Canada works closely with WHO in the area of infectious
                                                                                                 through the Pan American Health Organization [PAHO].
                  diseases. Canadian representatives sit on the advisory
                  boards of WHO’s Communicable Diseases cluster and the
                                                                                                 Unfortunately, Health Canada lacks an overarching
                  Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network [GOARN].
                                                                                                 strategy for international collaboration and has not
                  WHO relies extensively on Health Canada’s Global
                                                                                                 prioritized international activities. Recognizing this
                  Public Health Intelligence Network [GPHIN]*, a unique
                                                                                                 weakness, PPHB has been collating its international
                  early-warning system mentioned in several previous
                                                                                                 activities over the past six months to inform strategic
                  chapters. GPHIN continuously scans Internet media
                                                                                                 development. A deficiency that will need to be addressed
                  sources for reports of infectious disease outbreaks around
                                                                                                 as part of this process is the lack of an emerging infectious
                  the world. Three Health Canada staff members are
                                                                                                 diseases strategy with strong international elements.
                  seconded to WHO to provide technical advice, support,
                                                                                                 SARS has illustrated that our borders do not protect us
                  and training opportunities, but not explicitly to improve
                                                                                                 from disease and that we are constantly a short flight
                  liaison. As well, Health Canada’s Population and Public
                                                                                                 away from serious epidemics. Strengthening the capacity
                  Health Branch [PPHB] includes a number of WHO
                                                                                                 of other nations to detect and respond to emerging
                  Collaborating Centres, enabling alliances to improve
                                                                                                 infectious disease is important from the point of view of
S A R S




                  epidemiologic and laboratory response to international
                                                                                                 enlightened self interest as well as a global responsibility
                  issues.
                                                                                                 for a country with Canada’s resources.
f r o m




                  * A partnership between WHO and Health Canada, the GPHIN is a unique, early-warning, Internet-based system that provides preliminary public health
                    information about global health risks on a real-time, 24/7 basis. From multiple information sources, including global media outlets, GPHIN gathers
                    and disseminates relevant public health information on disease outbreaks. Basic reports are processed by a computer and then human analysts
                    review each report for relevance and accuracy. From approximately 18,000 total monthly reports received, approximately 3,000 are accessed by
                    WHO, which selects the most urgent for verification with the affected country. GPHIN reports approximately 40% of the outbreaks known to WHO.
L e a r n i n g




                    In addition to infectious disease reports, GPHIN covers environmental contaminants, natural disasters, nuclear safety, product recalls and safety,
                    therapeutics, and bioterrorism. Identified news is electronically disseminated to users, who include government and public health officials in Canada
                    and around the world.



                  198         .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


11A.2 World Health Organization                                 of outbreak management efforts in different countries.
                                                                The Committee heard some concern expressed about a
In 1948, the United Nations created the World Health            situation in which nations such as Canada are expected
Organization. With 192 member countries, WHO’s                  to ‘report to’ the WHO, and what this precedent
governance structure includes the World Health Assembly         portends for member states more generally.
(all member states), an Executive Board (32 health experts),
and a Secretariat (3,500 staff) headed by a Director-General.
In addition to the headquarters in Geneva, WHO operates         11B. International Response
six regional offices. The organization’s global budget is            to SARS
about US$1 billion; a portion of this derives from annual
contributions from member countries. Canada’s                   11B.1 WHO Response to SARS
contribution for 2003 was over US$10 million.
                                                                WHO issued an unprecedented global health alert on
Over the last half century, WHO has generally focused           SARS on March 12, 2003. By this time, SARS had already
on infectious diseases commonly found in developing             spread from Hong Kong and Guangdong province of
countries—malaria and tuberculosis, for example. While          China to Viet Nam, Singapore, Thailand, and Canada.
WHO has engaged in global surveillance of these diseases
and has directed specific responses (e.g., immunization         Very early in the outbreak, WHO established contact with
campaigns), until recently it lacked the ability to respond     affected countries and offered epidemiologic, laboratory,
to and manage outbreaks. Prior to 2000, WHO employed            and clinical support. By March 17, 2003, WHO was
a relatively passive approach to the international notifi-      coordinating an international multi-centre effort that
cation of outbreaks of infectious diseases by member            united 11 laboratories in ten countries to identify the
states. Data from developing nations were often several         causative agent and develop a diagnostic test. Meanwhile,
years old before their release. Even more importantly,          GOARN teams in Hanoi and Hong Kong were collecting
when affected by outbreaks that could potentially have          clinical and epidemiologic data as well as helping manage
international economic impact (e.g., a reduction in             the outbreak; Canada participated actively in the GOARN
tourism), countries sometimes failed to notify WHO.             effort in Hong Kong. Through its regional office in
                                                                Manila, WHO established logistics bases and supply
The combination of the 1992 Institute of Medicine               chains to ensure the rapid provision of protective
report on emerging infectious diseases with outbreaks of        equipment and medicines.
pneumonic plague in India in 1994 and Ebola in the
Congo in 1995 prompted WHO to develop a strategy for            SARS provided a new challenge for WHO’s Communicable




                                                                                                                               C a n a d a
more proactive responses. It had (and still has) specified      Disease Surveillance and Response group—it was a non-
only that plague, yellow fever, and cholera must be             focal, multi-country outbreak of a hitherto-unknown
reported to WHO by member nations. While formal                 disease. As we learned in Chapter 6, close international
surveillance efforts are only now being expanded, the           collaboration on laboratory and epidemiologic aspects
partnership with Health Canada to create the GPHIN              was successfully brokered by WHO primarily through
represented WHO’s first step towards a worldwide early          teleconferences. It also established a secure web page to




                                                                                                                               i n
warning system for outbreaks. As noted, GPHIN provides          facilitate international collaboration.
global surveillance capacity and bypasses the traditionally


                                                                                                                               H e a l t h
slow passage of information from local agencies to national     WHO first issued case definitions for SARS on
governments and then to WHO. WHO also established               March 15, 2003. At that time, a suspect case was anyone
the GOARN, a collaboration of over 118 institutions that        with fever and respiratory symptoms such as cough or
responds to WHO requests for rapidly mobile teams of            shortness of breath. A probable case was someone with
experts in infectious disease control within 24 hours of a      close contact with a person diagnosed with SARS and a
                                                                                                                               P u b l i c



request by a member state. GOARN has demonstrated its           history of travel to a SARS-affected area, or a suspect case
ability to deploy relatively large international teams of       with x-ray findings of pneumonia. These definitions
epidemiologists, clinicians, statisticians, and logistics       were refined over the following weeks to more accurately
personnel in response to outbreaks such as Ebola virus in       detect and exclude cases. Revised definitions issued on
Gabon and Uganda, severe influenza in Madagascar, and           May 1 required the fulfillment of four criteria for a
                                                                suspect SARS case: fever; cough or shortness of breath;
                                                                                                                               o f




plague in Algeria. Last, during the SARS epidemic, WHO
has begun issuing travel advisories for the first time,         an epidemiologic link (close contact with a suspect or
                                                                probable case; recent travel or residence in an area where
                                                                                                                               R e n e w a l




acting—without explicit authorization by member states—
as a trans-national clearinghouse to assess the safety of       local transmission has occurred); and the absence of an
international travel and, by extension, the effectiveness       alternative diagnosis. A probable SARS case had all the


..........................................................................................                             199
                  .................................................................................................

                  features of a suspect case plus x-ray, laboratory, or autopsy   to affect the same populations—mainly health care
                  findings consistent with SARS. WHO was forced to                workers, hospital patients, and household contacts—
                  maintain a clinical/epidemiologic definition because no         irrespective of country, there were several key differences
                  validated, widely available laboratory test for SARS had        in how the outbreaks were managed in the various
                  yet been developed.                                             jurisdictions.

                  We have previously reviewed various criticisms of the           Singapore’s experience is illuminating as its outbreak
                  SARS case definitions. Even the symptoms that were              was similar in magnitude to that faced in Toronto
                  included in the definition may not have been the most           (see Figure 1). Singapore is a city-state with a population
                  appropriate; an evaluation of the criteria looking specifi-     of just over four million, comparable to the GTA. In
                  cally at the clinical presentations of Hong Kong patients       Singapore, a single hospital was designated as the “SARS
                  was published in the British Medical Journal on June 21,        hospital,” caring for all SARS patients. This hospital
                  and it found that the WHO criteria would miss nearly            liaised with public health in a seamless operation to
                  75% of cases when applied to people presenting early in         perform all contact tracing within 24 hours of suspect or
                  their course of illness. A further concern has been that        probable SARS cases being admitted—a clear contrast
                  the WHO case definition did not distinguish between             with the situation in Toronto.
                  Toronto, as a so-called “SARS-affected area,” and specific
                  exposure sites that were publicized by both provincial          Those who were placed under quarantine in Singapore
                  and federal public health officials. As noted in Chapter        received compensation either directly or indirectly from
                  5, this sometimes led other countries to treat individuals      the government. In Canada, only certain employees
                  who had visited Toronto or even transited through               were eligible for benefits, while those who were self-
                  Toronto’s Pearson Airport as potential SARS cases. Other        employed or who did not qualify for benefits suffered
                  provinces and territories worked with the more specific         from lost income. In Singapore, quarantine orders were
                  Health Canada definition rather than viewing everyone           issued by a private security company with twice daily calls
                  from the Greater Toronto Area [GTA] with respiratory            by videophone. The very few violations that occurred
                  symptoms and a fever as a possible SARS case.                   resulted in the use of electronic tracking bracelets.
                                                                                  In Toronto, public health staff struggled with massive
                  Criteria for a new disease inevitably must evolve as infor-     human resource shortages; at times, they were able to call
                  mation about the disease cumulates. Some confusion was          quarantined individuals only once every three days.
                  therefore inevitable. However, WHO’s criteria meant that
                  records of exported cases used in the WHO assessment for        Singapore also benefited from strong leadership with a
                  the Toronto travel advisory included individuals who            single point of command-and-control. In fairness, Singapore
                  would not have met the Canadian case definition. Rapid          as a city-state is organized in a much less complex fashion
                  contact with countries diagnosing “cases” from Canada           than Canada, where three levels of government were
                  usually led to an understanding on both sides. More             involved in the SARS outbreak. Nonetheless, Dr. Tony
                  generally, discrepancies between the WHO definition and         Tan, Singapore’s Minister of Health, was clearly in charge.
                  those used by individual countries were a recurrent             He held daily press conferences each morning, where he
                  source of confusion in the media.                               shared not only facts but also uncertainties and potential
                                                                                  worst-case scenarios, along with actions that Singaporeans
                  Only in June at the WHO Global Meeting on SARS in               could and should take to protect themselves and others.
                  Malaysia did it become clear that many countries had            In Canada, multiple public health officials, clinicians,
                  adopted their own case definitions. Surprisingly, this          and politicians appeared at various times on news
                  practice was sanctioned by WHO itself. The Committee            broadcasts, variously generating anxiety with mixed
                  believes that further attention is needed to determine the      messages or over-reassuring the public.
S A R S




                  respective roles of a body such as WHO and its member
                  states in defining a new disease such as SARS.                  Singapore also conducted active surveillance for fevers
                                                                                  and pneumonias among all hospital inpatients, searching
                  11B.2 International Experiences                                 for any cases that may have been missed. We believe that
f r o m




                                                                                  the ineffectiveness of such programs in Toronto hospitals
                  While the focus in Canada was on the domestic SARS              contributed to SARS II. Differences in human resources
                  situation, several Asian countries faced even greater           were also evident: Singapore’s 1400-bed Tan Tock Seng
                  challenges in containing their outbreaks. Each outbreak         Hospital had 40 staff carrying out active surveillance,
L e a r n i n g




                  was ultimately controlled through isolating cases,              while most hospitals in the GTA, as noted in Chapters 7
                  tracing and quarantining contacts, and maintaining              and 8, had insufficient staff for ordinary infection control,
                  vigilance in surveillance efforts. Although SARS seemed         let alone comprehensive syndromic surveillance.

                  200       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


 F   I G U R E          1    100


 Statistically estimated
 SARS infection curves of
                              80
 affected areas (except
 for People’s Republic of
 China).
                              60
 y axis: expected number
 of daily new infections,
 calculated from the
 SARS epidemic curves         40
 by dates of onset of
 symptoms published by
 the World Health             20
 Organization; x axis:
 dates of new infections
 Source: Ping Yan,
                               0
 Health Canada
                                   21-Feb-03



                                               01-Mar-03



                                                                 11-Mar-03



                                                                             21-Mar-03



                                                                                            31-Mar-03



                                                                                                         10-Apr-03



                                                                                                                     20-Apr-03



                                                                                                                                 30-Apr-03



                                                                                                                                               10-May-03



                                                                                                                                                           20-May-03



                                                                                                                                                                       30-May-03
                                                           Hong Kong                                    Taiwan                               Viet Nam

                                                           Singapore                                    Canada



11C. Canadian-International                                                              were infected through a defective sewage system, and
                                                                                         also at the Metropole Hotel, the epicentre of the outbreak
     Communication and Liaison                                                           in Hong Kong. Overall, however, Canada missed out on
                                                                                         valuable opportunities to learn from other countries.
Liaison                                                                                  In contrast, those involved in managing the Singapore
Liaison with, and transmission of information to and                                     outbreak followed the Canadian situation closely.




                                                                                                                                                                                   C a n a d a
from other countries and international organizations are                                 Provincial and municipal representatives from Canada
important functions in the public health system at all                                   visited Beijing when the Chinese government extended
times. These tasks are crucial when a public health crisis                               an invitation in the lull between SARS I and SARS II, and
emerges. Soon after SARS arrived in Canada, Health                                       Health Canada officials visited Singapore only after the
Canada and the Atlanta-based CDC exchanged one staff                                     global outbreak was essentially over.




                                                                                                                                                                                   i n
member to act as liaison officers. This arrangement lasted
several weeks and greatly facilitated interactions between                               Communication


                                                                                                                                                                                   H e a l t h
the two bodies. Similarly, a staff person from the                                       Although Health Canada regularly transmitted information
Communicable Disease Surveillance Centre of England                                      to WHO during the SARS outbreak, it was unable to
and Wales was posted to Health Canada’s Emergency                                        supply as much detail as was formally requested.2 The
Operations Centre in Ottawa for a week-long stint.                                       absence of formal reporting processes between municipal,
                                                                                         provincial, and federal governments contributed greatly
However, the bulk of SARS cases were in Asia, and experts
                                                                                                                                                                                   P u b l i c


                                                                                         to deficiencies in data acquisition and sharing. Some
there were gaining invaluable experience. Many observers                                 experts told the Committee that Canada was simply unable
felt that Canadian officials failed to connect closely enough                            to maintain the confidence of WHO due to incomplete
with officials in Hong Kong, Singapore and China. One                                    accounting of the outbreak and control measures as well
exception occurred when WHO asked scientists from the                                    as obvious inter-jurisdictional tensions.
National Microbiology Laboratory [NML] and the
                                                                                                                                                                                   o f




Workplace Health and Public Safety Program to provide
technical advice to Hong Kong, specifically at Amoy
                                                                                                                                                                                   R e n e w a l




Gardens, an apartment block where hundreds of residents



..........................................................................................                                                                             201
                  .................................................................................................

                  Health Canada officials have stated that they repeatedly         The role of the travel industry in communications efforts
                  asked the Province of Ontario for more detailed information      should also be recognized. Airports indicated that they
                  regarding the cases of SARS. A document outlining the            provided communications equipment and services to
                  initial proposed data elements and the reason for collecting     Health Canada, provided updates to the airport community
                  the information was sent to the Ontario Ministry of              by way of bulletins and video records, and also organized
                  Health and Long-Term Care [OMHLTC] on April 5, 2003.             and hosted meetings for stakeholders. A number of travel
                  Besides Health Canada, both WHO and the other                    industry stakeholders have called for the establishment
                  provinces and territories within Canada were requesting          of a communication strategy for infectious diseases
                  detailed information. The federal perspective is that            which includes contact points for the travel industry.
                  Ontario continued to submit incomplete data during the
                  first part of the outbreak, and federal officials often gained
                  new information from Ontario’s daily press conference
                                                                                   11D. Travel Advisories
                  rather than through intergovernmental channels. As               11D.1 WHO Advisories
                  noted in Chapter 2, the perspective from the Public Health
                  Branch of OMHLTC is sharply different. During the                On April 2, 2003, WHO issued a travel advisory
                  second phase of the SARS outbreak, it is clear that the          recommending the postponement of all but essential
                  disagreements over data flow had largely abated.                 travel to Hong Kong and China’s Guangdong province.
                                                                                   This was the first time the international agency had ever
                  The accounts of SARS in Chapters 2 and 5 have demon-             issued such an advisory; previously, only individual
                  strated that the local public health units and the provincial    countries had issued travel advisories.
                  Public Health Branch were overwhelmed by the enormous
                  workload during the SARS outbreak. Simply creating the           On April 23, 2003, WHO added Toronto, Beijing, and
                  requisite agreements for sharing data is not enough;             China’s Shanxi province to the list of areas that travellers
                                                                                   should avoid. The advice against non-essential travel to
                  capacity must be built at all levels of the public health
                                                                                   Toronto was scheduled to be in place for three weeks
                  system to permit a more coordinated response to
                                                                                   before reappraisal. As we noted in Chapter 2, the reaction
                  outbreaks with adequate analysis and reportage.
                                                                                   of Canadian officials was swift and angry, with politicians
                                                                                   and public health officials from multiple levels of govern-
                  Although Health Canada designated spokespeople in
                                                                                   ment travelling to Geneva to provide documentation
                  English and French for SARS, the problem of mixed messages
                                                                                   that Toronto’s outbreak was under control and to request
                  occurred federally as well as provincially. For example, the
                                                                                   that WHO remove the travel advisory. On April 29, less
                  Canadian Embassy to the United States later complained
                                                                                   than a week after the initial announcement, WHO lifted
                  about the multiple and at times divergent messages coming
                                                                                   its Toronto advisory.
                  from Health Canada and the Department of Foreign
                  Affairs and International Trade. They suggested that the
                                                                                   Recognizing the threat of an emerging infectious disease,
                  departments find a way to centralize incoming and
                                                                                   WHO apparently felt a need to support and protect less
                  outgoing information, including press releases.
                                                                                   developed countries. The SARS global health alert was
                                                                                   predicated on the risk of transmission of the disease to
                  Submissions to the Committee from the travel industry
                                                                                   countries that would not have the infrastructure to cope
                  also raised concerns about communications on SARS,
                                                                                   with SARS, and the advisories reinforced this warning.
                  indicating significant gaps and inconsistencies with
                                                                                   However, the effects of the travel advisories have been
                  respect to information on SARS available to passengers
                                                                                   profound on the economies of targeted countries.
                  and staff. Airports were overburdened with calls from
                                                                                   Canadians were particularly frustrated by the difference
                  the public looking for health-related travel information
                                                                                   in concurrent categorization of Toronto by the CDC and
                  yet they could not get a coordinated message on SARS
S A R S




                                                                                   WHO, with WHO issuing a more severe warning. Some
                  from health officials. Some airports and transport carriers
                                                                                   have suggested that WHO should confine itself to
                  retained the services of a medical expert to educate staff
                  on infectious diseases, both to help them do their jobs          informing countries of the epidemiologic situation in
                  and to quell their concerns and fears.                           member countries and not issue travel advisories.
f r o m
L e a r n i n g




                  202       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

The controversies surrounding the WHO travel advisory          During the SARS outbreak, the major concern was the
were augmented by the content of the travel advisory           extent of community spread and the risk that community
criteria and the communication process leading up to the       spread might pose to the Canadian traveller. In addition,
announcement of the advisory. The criteria seem arbitrary      as it became clear that hospitals were sources of transmis-
and were developed during the outbreak without a               sion of SARS, Health Canada became concerned that
formal consultation process or serious scientific debate.      Canadian travellers with pre-existing medical conditions
The criteria referred to “prevalent cases” (which apparently   might have to seek medical care in seriously affected
included persons with SARS still in isolation), categor-       SARS countries, thereby incurring the risk of exposure.
ically assessed as more or less than 60, more or less than
5 new cases per day on a three day rolling average, and        Health Canada used information from WHO on affected
local transmission. The export of SARS to other countries      area status, and combined this with information collected
was also considered.                                           by GPHIN and other sources to produce a score that was
                                                               then translated into an advisory. In this scoring system,
None of these criteria has ever been validated as reasons      Health Canada used WHO’s categorical labels that were
for issuing a travel advisory. The 60-case threshold has       based on the transmission pattern in a particular city or
been described as arising “out of the blue”. One senior        province. These were translated into numbers and
Health Canada official who acted as the liaison with           averaged for a country, and then an advisory for the
WHO and criticized the criteria, was under the                 country would be generated.
impression that the criteria were still in draft form even
as WHO used them to impose the advisory on Toronto             The Committee can find no evidence to suggest that
and other regions. There are conflicting accounts as to        Health Canada’s own scoring system has a much firmer
whether warning was given in a telephone call about the        grounding than the WHO criteria. By using the WHO
impending travel advisory in a conversation among              “affected area” definitions, Health Canada incorporated
WHO, PAHO, and Health Canada staff about the                   criteria into its travel advisories that it criticized when
“affected area” criteria. In any event, within 24 hours of     WHO applied them to Toronto. This system was used
that conversation, a travel advisory had been issued.          throughout the outbreak, and led to the issuance of
While there were some brief recriminations between             travel advisories for other jurisdictions such as Hong
public health officials, one positive effect of the advisory   Kong. As one can see in the Table 1, the travel advisories
was to create a welcome unity of response among all            issued by WHO and Health Canada diverged, with the
levels of government.                                          Canadian advisories at times more severe than those of
                                                               WHO. This and other conflicts between WHO and
The Committee can find little rationale for the criteria or    Health Canada advisories sparked an expression of




                                                                                                                             C a n a d a
the timing of the WHO travel advisory. If WHO is to            concern by the Department of Foreign Affairs and
continue issuing advisories, clear criteria and a process      International Trade. Canadian missions abroad also were
for notice must be developed by agreement among                questioned as to the reason why travel advisories from
member states.                                                 Canada differed to those of WHO.

11D.2 Health Canada Advisories


                                                                                                                             i n
                                                               In short, while many Canadian officials have been
                                                               critical of WHO over the lack of evidence for its travel
In Canada, travel advisories are issued by Health Canada’s     advisory criteria, Canada’s own practices should be


                                                                                                                             H e a l t h
Travel Medicine Program, which assesses the risk for           revisited, ideally in the context of a multilateral re-
Canadians travelling abroad through information obtained       assessment of the basis, nature, goals, and impact of
from WHO, GPHIN, the Department of Foreign Affairs             advice to travellers.
and International Trade, and other sources. Three levels
of advisories are used: routine advice (i.e., no advisory),
                                                               11E. SARS and Travel Issues
                                                                                                                             P u b l i c



defer all non-essential travel, and defer all travel. This
system has existed for many years, and advisories have
                                                               As early as March 15, 2003, WHO issued an emergency
been issued on outbreaks of new and known diseases, as
                                                               travel advisory warning travellers and airline crews to be
well as natural disasters and hazards, such as bushfires
                                                               alert for symptoms consistent with SARS, and they
in Australia.
                                                               outlined basic procedures for airlines in the event that a
                                                                                                                             o f




                                                               passenger or aircrew member became symptomatic in-
                                                               flight. Later, after its annual World Health Assembly
                                                                                                                             R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                            203
                  .................................................................................................


                    T   A B L E          1
                    Comparison of travel advice against Hong Kong by WHO and Health Canada
                    Date         WHO                                                                Health Canada

                    25 March     Recommends no travel restriction to any destination                Recommends that people planning to travel to Hong Kong
                                 including Hong Kong.                                               should defer all travel until further notice.

                    2 April      As a measure of precaution, WHO recommends that                    Recommends that people planning to travel to Hong Kong
                                 persons traveling to Hong Kong consider postponing                 should defer all travel and alternate routing be considered,
                                 all but essential travel. This recommendation applies              when possible, if a traveler is transiting through Hong
                                 to travelers entering Hong Kong, not to passengers                 Kong.
                                 directly transiting through the Hong Kong international
                                 airport.

                    13 May                                                                          Recommends that people planning to travel to Hong Kong
                                                                                                    should defer all travel and recommend alternate routing
                                                                                                    be considered, when possible, if a traveler is transiting
                                                                                                    through Hong Kong.

                    15 May                                                                          Based on the evidence that the SARS situation had
                                                                                                    peaked and is confined to certain well defined areas in
                                                                                                    Hong Kong, Health Canada recommends to defer all
                                                                                                    elective or non-essential travel to Hong Kong.

                    23 May       Removes the recommendation that people should
                                 postpone all but essential travel (i.e., no travel restriction).

                    30 May                                                                          Due to the continued concern about limited spread of
                                                                                                    SARS Health Canada recommends to defer all elective or
                                                                                                    non-essential travel to Hong Kong.

                    16 June                                                                         Due to the continued concern about limited spread of
                                                                                                    SARS Health Canada recommends to defer all elective or
                                                                                                    non-essential travel to Hong Kong.

                    23 June      Hong Kong removed from the list of areas with recent               No further mention of any travel restriction against
                                 local transmission, i.e., the chain of human-to-human              Hong Kong.
                                 transmission is considered broken, thus eliminating the
                                 risk of infection for both local residents and travelers.

                  meeting in May, WHO’s SARS Resolution urged member                            undergo a medical examination and to detain that person
                  states to apply their guidelines regarding international                      if necessary. The Act lists four contagious diseases:
                  travel.                                                                       cholera, plague, yellow fever and smallpox. In keeping
                                                                                                with WHO’s urging that member nations take the
                  11E.1 Quarantine Act                                                          necessary steps to address the SARS outbreak, Health
                                                                                                Canada has amended the Quarantine Act Regulations.
S A R S




                  Under the Quarantine Act and Regulations, the federal                         The amendments include adding SARS to the Quarantine
                  government exercises its responsibility to help protect                       Act’s Schedule of infectious and contagious diseases;
                  Canadians from diseases which might pose a threat to                          prescribing an incubation period for SARS (20 days);
                  public health through the international movement of                           providing quarantine officers with the authority to compel
f r o m




                  people, goods and conveyances (e.g., airplanes, ships,                        airline carriers on relevant incoming and outgoing flights
                  vehicles, etc.). The Quarantine Act and Regulations give                      to distribute SARS health information and questionnaires
                  quarantine officers at Canadian ports of entry and exit the                   to all persons on board; and extending the list of airports
                  authority to require that a person suspected of having a                      where an aircraft arriving in Canada must report, before
L e a r n i n g




                  disease listed in the Act or another dangerous disease                        landing, cases of illness or death on board the aircraft.




                  204         .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


11E.2 Quarantine Officers                                                   they were also required to provide contact information to
                                                                            allow public health officials to trace them in the event
In 2002, Health Canada informed airport authorities that                    that a fellow passenger was diagnosed with SARS. Posters
it would be transferring airport quarantine responsibilities                with pertinent information about SARS were placed in
to Canada Customs. Customs staff were never trained to                      strategic locations around the airports.
do the job. When SARS arrived, Canada had only a tiny
contingent of quarantine officers prepared to screen                        On March 27, 2003, WHO recommended that areas with
passengers arriving from Asia. A few Health Canada                          local transmission of SARS institute measures to screen
nurses were rapidly trained and dispatched to Toronto                       departing travelers. Health Canada responded by
and Vancouver to act as quarantine officers by March 18.                    providing cherry-coloured Health Alert Notices identical
Later, more officers were deployed to international airports                to those being provided for incoming travelers.
in Montreal, Calgary, and Ottawa. The responsibilities of
the quarantine officers have traditionally included                         In May, as part of the understanding that led WHO to
assessing passengers and cargo from aircraft, ships, trains,                rescind its travel advisory, the federal government agreed
cars, etc., and detaining any person or object suspected                    to institute further exit screening of air travelers. The
of being infected.                                                          information cards for both arriving and departing travelers
                                                                            were revised to include a set of screening questions* in an
During the SARS outbreak, the handful of quarantine                         effort to detect symptomatic individuals. Anyone who
officers performed screening, handed out information to                     answered “yes” to any of the questions was interviewed
travelers, and responded to requests from flight crews,                     by Health Canada screening nurses; and any possible SARS
customs, and immigration officers for assistance in the                     cases would be promptly isolated and transferred to health
assessment of sick persons on aircraft. Normally in                         facilities for further evaluation. WHO also suggested that
March, 12 to 14 flights arrive from Asia daily, and with                    the use of thermal scanners be considered. One machine
the average capacity on each flight being 315 passengers,                   was graciously loaned to Canada by Singapore, and others
over 27,000 passengers required screening each week.                        acquired as part of a pilot project to test the technology.
With the drop in tourism due to SARS during April and                       These machines were installed in Toronto and Vancouver
May, the volume was reduced to about 19,000 per week.                       to detect travelers with fever.
In any case, the quarantine officers were quickly over-
extended and eventually needed additional assistance,                       In submissions to the Committee, airport authorities in
which was provided by local public health authorities                       both Vancouver and Toronto were critical of Health
and Health Canada’s regional First Nations and Inuit                        Canada’s organizational ability and operational capacity
Health Branch office.                                                       in managing travel screening. The Vancouver International




                                                                                                                                                  C a n a d a
                                                                            Airport Authority submission to the committee noted, for
Airport authorities made submissions expressing concern                     example, that Health Canada officials repeatedly referred
about Health Canada’s ability to mobilize knowledgeable                     to a “contingency plan” that “had never progressed
quarantine staff to the airports, to provide logistical                     beyond the draft stage and appeared to (have been)
support, and to manage communications to their own                          abandoned.” They also noted that the language barriers
staff, the airports, air carriers, and the public. Airport




                                                                                                                                                  i n
                                                                            of many travelers were not appropriately addressed;
authorities clearly felt that Health Canada quarantine                      information should have been provided in Chinese as
staff were sent into the situation with limited briefing                    well as English and French.


                                                                                                                                                  H e a l t h
and little or no supporting materials.
                                                                            As of August 27, 2003, an estimated 6.5 million screening
11E.3 Screening Measures and Provision                                      transactions occurred at Canadian airports to aid in the
      of Health Information                                                 detection and prevention of SARS transmission. Roughly
                                                                            9,100 passengers were referred for further assessment by
                                                                                                                                                  P u b l i c



Screening of incoming air passengers was started as an                      screening nurses or quarantine officers. None had SARS.
initial response to prevent importation of SARS.                            Over 3.2 million arriving passengers were screened using
(Appendix 11.1 provides a chronology of airport screening                   yellow cards; compliance was close to 100% because of
in Canada.) Passengers from Asia were “visually screened”                   the mandatory review by Customs officials. Over
and greeted with yellow Health Alert Notices providing                      990,000 outbound passengers were screened at Toronto’s
                                                                                                                                                  o f




instructions on how to self-monitor for SARS symptoms;                      Pearson international airport using cherry cards. Audits
                                                                                                                                                  R e n e w a l




* Do you have a fever? Do you have one or more of the following symptoms: cough, shortness of breath or difficulty breathing? Have you been in
  contact with a SARS-affected person in the last 10 days?



..........................................................................................                                                  205
                  .................................................................................................

                  conducted by Health Canada staff demonstrated that               Formal screening may be difficult to justify, but provision
                  there was also a high rate of compliance with cherry             of timely and practical health information to travelers is
                  cards; over 90% of departing international passengers            much less expensive and based on the defensible assump-
                  indicated that they had received the cards and had been          tion that the vast majority of persons are rational and
                  asked health-related questions at check-in by airline staff.     well-intentioned, and can make intelligent risk assessments.
                                                                                   The benefit of providing health information to travelers
                  The pilot thermal scanner project included most inbound          has been demonstrated in at least one anecdotal report of
                  and outbound international passengers at Toronto’s               a person who arrived in British Columbia from an
                  airport, and all passengers on inbound flights from Asia,        affected area and was subsequently diagnosed as having
                  as well as a sample of three outbound international              SARS. He developed symptoms one to two days after
                  flights daily at Vancouver’s airport. Almost 2.4 million         arrival, isolated himself as instructed on the yellow
                  passengers were screened by late August, the vast majority       Health Alert Notice, and was admitted to hospital where
                  in Toronto. Only 832 required further assessment, and            isolation precautions were strictly followed. There was
                  again none were found to have SARS. More detailed                no secondary spread from this case.
                  statistics are provided in Appendix 11.2.
                                                                                   11E.4 Protocols for Airlines and Cruise
                  In other countries, the yields for airport screening                   Ships
                  measures were similarly low. An evaluation of airport
                  screening in Beijing revealed that despite screening over        At one point early in the SARS outbreak, a traveler who
                  275,000 travelers between April 24 and June 20, only             exhibited SARS-like symptoms arrived in Vancouver;
                  0.2% were determined to have fever. None had SARS.               Health Canada invoked the Quarantine Act to stop the
                  In Singapore, 30,000 passengers were screened each day,          aircraft from departing until it had been properly decon-
                  with about 60 of those assessed further. Again, none had         taminated. However, Health Canada officials were unable
                  SARS. Only in Hong Kong did airport screening yield              to advise the airline as to the requirements for adequate
                  any SARS cases—after screening millions of travelers with        decontamination because they were still unsure of the
                  thermal scanners, two SARS cases were found.                     cause of SARS. Protocols for aircraft and airlines were not
                                                                                   developed until the end of April. These outlined the
                  These results are not surprising. Screening for a rare           appropriate cleaning agents and protective measures to
                  disease like SARS in a large population (i.e., millions of       be used when decontaminating an aircraft that had
                  travelers) is both difficult and ineffective with an extremely   carried a potential SARS case. Health Canada’s protocols
                  low likelihood of actually detecting cases. Also, travel         for screening, handling of SARS cases, and cleaning cruise
                  screening fails to detect those who may be incubating the        ships were released in mid-June.
                  disease—these individuals would still be symptom-free.
                  Screening healthy people for infectious diseases should          Related problems encountered during the SARS outbreak
                  be based on certain premises: that a disease is present in       were jurisdictional disagreements between federal and
                  the general population, that it can be detected by screening     local officials, as well as between local health authorities,
                  measures, and that there is a high risk of transmission by       with regards to airports and ports situated within the
                  asymptomatic individuals. None of these conditions were          geographic boundaries of local health units. For example,
                  met by SARS. In the absence of such features, screening          University of British Columbia [UBC] Hospital in Vancouver
                  healthy people is expensive, possibly highly intrusive, and      was designated as the facility for SARS patients; however,
                  can create a false sense of security or needless anxieties.      the airport was located in the suburb of Richmond and
                                                                                   therefore part of a different health region. Travelers with
                  The claim that screening bolsters business confidence has        SARS-like symptoms were allegedly examined in the
                  been promoted by various countries at international              parking lot to determine whether they should be transported
S A R S




                  forums. Given the available data, screening appears to be        to the UBC Hospital or to the local Richmond Hospital.
                  more about conformity than logic or evidence, with no
                  country prepared to take the first step of abandoning            In all these instances, business processes can be
                  these measures. Furthermore, any measures implemented            developed to anticipate difficulties and ensure the faster
f r o m




                  at airports should theoretically be replicated at ports and      implementation of containment, decontamination, or
                  at land border crossings. In Canada, with 18 land border         referral protocols.
                  crossings with the US, this was impossible. Instead,
                  replicating the CDC's action, information cards were
L e a r n i n g




                  provided to an estimated 200,000 vehicles per month
                  entering Canada.



                  206       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


11F. Recommendations                                             in issuing travel advice, and to establish a
                                                                 procedure for providing advance notice for
Having regard to the international issues reviewed above,        possible alerts and advice. The notice process
the Committee recommends that:                                   should provide a mechanism for consultation
                                                                 with and a response by the target country.
11.1 The Government of Canada should take the               11.6 The Government of Canada should ensure that
     lead, along with an international consortium                an adequate complement of quarantine
     of committed partners, in the detection of                  officers is maintained at airports and other
     global emerging diseases and outbreaks. This                ports of entry, as required. Fully trained and
     should be done through enhancements to the                  informed quarantine officers should be
     Global Public Health Intelligence Network and               available at airports to deal with health
     similar programs.                                           threats, to provide information to and educate
11.2 The Canadian Agency for Public Health should                airport staff, customs officials, and airline
     have a mandate for greater engagement inter-                personnel concerning the recognition of illness
     nationally in the emerging infectious disease               and measures to be taken to contain risk.
     field, including the initiation of projects to              Close collaboration with airport authorities
     build capacity for surveillance and outbreak                and airline personnel to clarify responsibilities
     management in developing countries.                         in the event of a health threat is necessary.

11.3 The Canadian Agency for Public Health should           11.7 The Government of Canada should ensure that
     be the institution responsible for direct commu-            incoming and outgoing passengers are provided
     nication with the World Health Organization,                with health information about where and when
     the US CDC, and other international organiza-               health threats exist, including any precautionary
     tions and jurisdictions. The Agency should                  measures to take, how to identify symptoms of
     disseminate within Canada information received              the disease, and what first steps to take in case
     from international organizations and jurisdic-              of suspected infection. A partnership with the
     tions on global health threats, and in turn, it             travel industry would facilitate this process so
     would inform the World Health Organization                  that information could be provided at the time
     and other jurisdictions of relevant Canadian                of bookings. The current Health Canada web
     events. During outbreak situations, the Agency              site containing information for travelers
     would perform the role of liaising between                  should be made more prominent and its
     Canadian and international organizations and                existence promoted.




                                                                                                                        C a n a d a
     jurisdictions to maximize mutual learning.             11.8 All federal/provincial/territorial/municipal
11.4 The Government of Canada should review its                  response plans should include port/cruiseship-
     travel screening techniques and protocols with              and airport/airplane-specific protocols for
     a view to ensuring that travel screening measures           infectious diseases as well as protocols for
     are based on evidence for public health effec-              employee protection guidelines and decontam-




                                                                                                                        i n
     tiveness, while taking into account the                     ination of aircraft, ships, and/or facilities.
     financial and human resources required for their            Jurisdictional issues concerning travel and health


                                                                                                                        H e a l t h
     implementation and sustained operation. The                 need to be resolved through the plan. The plan
     Government of Canada should also initiate a                 should be developed with input and buy-in
     multilateral dialogue with other nations that               from local health officials, response agencies,
     are currently engaged in SARS travel screening              ports, airports and the relevant companies in
     to determine whether and when some or all of                the shipping and airline industries.
                                                                                                                        P u b l i c


     these measures should be modified or
     discontinued.                                          References
11.5 The Government of Canada should seek the
                                                            1. Institute of Medicine, “Emerging Infections: Microbial
     support of international partners to launch a
                                                               Threats to Health in the United States”, January 1,
     multilateral process under the auspices of the
                                                                                                                        o f




                                                               1992. Accessed on Aug 4 2003 at
     World Health Organization that would set
                                                               http://www.iom.edu/report.asp?id=4572.
     agreed-upon standards of evidence for the
                                                                                                                        R e n e w a l




     issuance of travel advisories and alerts by            2. World Health Organization, Weekly Epidemiologic
     member states. The multilateral process                   Record, 2003, 78 (14): 102-105.
     should also seek to determine the role of WHO

..........................................................................................                       207
                  .................................................................................................


                  Appendix 11.1
                  A Chronology of SARS Travel Screening
                  Chronology - SARS Screening (2003)
                  February 24    SARS arrives in Canada carried by individual returning from Hong Kong
                  March 12       WHO issues global alert on “mysterious virus-pox” epidemic in China
                  March 13       Health Canada notified of several cases of atypical pneumonia in Ontario
                  March 18       Quarantine Officers deployed. HC begins distribution of “Health Alert Notices” to travelers arriving
                                 in & returning to Canada from Asia at Pearson and Vancouver airports
                  March 21       Yellow health information cards distributed to major airports in Canada
                  March 24       HC deploys personnel to Dorval for increased screening of incoming passengers
                  March 27       WHO recommends SARS-affected areas with known transmission to institute measures to identify
                                 international passengers with symptoms. Also issues recommendations to airlines regarding suspected
                                 cases in-flight
                  April 3        Distribution of cherry cards for passengers departing Pearson on international flights implemented –
                                 expands to Toronto Island Airport and train stations April 7
                  April 9        In-flight distribution of Yellow cards and contact forms begin on 9 airlines with flights from Asia
                  April 23       WHO travel advisory in place for Toronto, lifted April 30
                  May 7          Thermal scanner on loan from Singapore operational at Pearson
                  May 14         Toronto removed from WHO’s list of areas with local transmission. Returned to list May 26 and removed
                                 again on July 2
                  May 16         Distribution of revised Yellow health alert cards (with questions) begins at Toronto and Vancouver for
                                 international travellers on all Asian airlines bringing passengers into Canada and Air Canada (flights
                                 from Asia)
                  May 16         Distribution of revised Cherry cards (with questions) for outbound flights begins at Toronto for 5
                                 international airlines. Six Thermal Scanners set up in Vancouver airport for all incoming international
                                 travelers (subsequently reduced to 5 due to malfunctioning equipment)
                  May 23         Six Thermal scanners set up in Toronto Pearson airport for all incoming and outgoing international
                                 travelers
                  June 2         Start distribution of Cherry cards for all outbound international airlines from Toronto
                  June 6         Yellow card screening in place for all international flights into Toronto and Vancouver and at
                                 18 land-border crossings from the U.S.
                  June 10        HC’s protocol for cruise ships posted online
S A R S




                  June 12        Amendments to the Quarantine Act and Regulations come into effect
                  June 14        Yellow card screening in place for all international flights arriving in Toronto, Vancouver, Calgary,
                                 Montreal and Ottawa
f r o m
L e a r n i n g




                  208        .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

Appendix 11.2
SARS Screening Measures - Daily Report August 27, 2003 (end-of-day)
                                          Daily Report                       Cumulative Report
  Measure       Location                    Further                                 Further                                     Comments
                               Screened                   Results      Screened                 Results
                                           Assessed                                Assessed

                                                                                                             All international flights flying from all terminals
                                                                                                             now using "Cherry Card" process.

   Cherry                                                                                                    August 8-12 audit findings of 1,302 passengers:
   Cards -       Toronto        10,074         7         all cleared    992,720      792       all cleared   93% of people surveyed (1,210) at Pearson
  outbound                                                                                                   responded they received a cherry card. 80%
                                                                                                             responded they had been asked health-related
                                                                                                             questions at check-in. Follow-up with airlines
                                                                                                             not fully complying.

                                                                                                             All international flights arriving daily in Toronto
                                                                                                             (70+ airlines), Vancouver (100+ airlines),
                                                                                                             Ottawa (13+ airlines), Calgary (20+ airlines),
                                                                                                             Dorval and Mirabel (23+) have yellow-card
                 Toronto        15,217         33        all cleared   1,091,709     3,158     all cleared   screening in place. Vancouver data to date
                                                                                                             only reports Asian airline arrivals. We are
                                                                                                             compiling past records to update this
   Yellow                                                                                                    information for all airlines.
   Cards -     Vancouver        4,118          24        all cleared   1,137,526     2,111     all cleared
  inbound
               Vancouver        2,774          16        all cleared    282,425      888       all cleared
               Vancouver        6,602          15        all cleared    629,599      1,103     all cleared
                 Ottawa         1,188          2         all cleared    61,768       236       all cleared
              Yellow Card      29,899          90                      3,203,027    7,476      all cleared
               Subtotal
  TOTAL ALL                                                  all                                    all
   CARDS                        39,973         97         cleared      4,195,847    8,268        cleared
                                                                                                             2 companies operating: FLIR (3) and Thermal
                                                                                                             Imaging Inc (3), all static:
                                                                                                             • Terminal 1 (2 machines - inbound and
                                                                                                               outbound)
                 Toronto        25,291         4         all cleared   2,051,141     791       all cleared   • Terminal 2 (2 machines - inbound and
                                                                                                               outbound)
  Scanners                                                                                                   • Terminal 3 (2 machines - inbound and
    (pilot                                                                                                     outbound)
   project)                                                                                                  • Hrs of operation per airline schedules.




                                                                                                                                                                   C a n a d a
                                                                                                               Shifts covering 8:30 a.m.- 9:00 p.m.
                                                                                                             2 companies operating: Mikron (3) FLIR (3):
                                                                                                             • 1 FLIR machine is hand-held.
               Vancouver        4,714          1         all cleared    310,745       41       all cleared   • Hrs of operation per airline schedule. Shifts
                                                                                                               covering 7:00 a.m.-11:00 p.m.

  TOTAL ALL                                                  all                                    all      Scanner leases have been extended to
  SCANNERS                      30,005         5                       2,361,886     832
                                                          cleared                                cleared     Sept. 16th.




                                                                                                                                                                   i n
                All airlines                                                                                 Videos were sent to Air Canada on July 31.
                 (with the                                                                                   Videos were sent to Philippine Airlines on July
               exception of                                                                                  7th. We have received confirmation from Air



                                                                                                                                                                   H e a l t h
                Air Canada      7 of 9 airlines from SARS-affected areas flying into Toronto & Vancouver     Canada that they will start showing the videos
    Video     and Philippine                               have copy of video                                beginning August 9. Philippine Airlines
               Airlines) are                                                                                 received their copies via the Canadian Consul
               showing the                                                                                   office in late July. They expect to be playing
                   video.                                                                                    them by mid-August.
              Approximately
              200,000 vehi-
                                                                                                                                                                   P u b l i c


              cles per month
    Land       are receiving
   Borders     yellow cards
                at 18 land-
                   border
                 crossings
   GRAND
 TOTAL ALL
                                                                                                                                                                   o f




                5,753,185
 SCREENING
 MEASURES =
                                                                                                                                                                   R e n e w a l




              represents the total passenger screening transactions: some people will have been screened twice (with cherry/yellow cards and then with
  5,753,185   thermal temperature scanners)




..........................................................................................                                                                  209
                              SARS and Public Health
Chapter 12



LEARNING FROM SARS:
Renewal of Public Health in Canada
.................................................................................................



SARS has demonstrated the speed with which a dangerous      As a disease outbreak, SARS was relatively small.
new disease can emerge and spread around the planet.        Nonetheless, the disease killed 44 Canadians, and caused
The seriousness of the outbreak and the challenges that     illness in a few hundred more. The response to the
arose in containing SARS are widely and rightly regarded    outbreak paralyzed a major segment of Ontario’s health
as signposts for the need to strengthen Canada’s public     care system for weeks, and saw more than 25,000 residents
health systems.                                             of the Greater Toronto Area placed in quarantine.
                                                            Psychosocial effects of SARS on health care workers,
In fact, the evidence of actual and potential harm to the   patients, and families are still being assessed, but the
health of Canadians from weaknesses in public health        economic shocks have already been felt. Estimates based
infrastructure has been mounting for years without a        on volumes of business compared to usual seasonal
truly comprehensive and multi-level governmental            activities suggest that tourism sustained a $350 million
response. Canada has faced the HIV epidemic, water          loss, airport activity reduction cost $220 million, and
contamination in Walkerton, Ontario and North               non-tourism retail sales were down by $380 million.
Battleford, Saskatchewan, and threats to the safety of      It seems entirely possible that the direct and indirect
Canadian blood supplies from HIV and Hepatitis B and        costs of SARS could reach $2 billion.
C. The events of September 11, 2001 and the related
anthrax attacks on our US neighbour heralded the            As Canada recovers from this extraordinary set of events,




                                                                                                                        C a n a d a
possibility of bioterrorism within our borders. Recently,   the National Advisory Committee on SARS and Public
one part of the country has faced economic hardship         Health has been weighing what lessons might be learned
caused by fears of the spread of BSE from cattle to         from the outbreak of SARS in Canada. The foregoing
humans, while others are trying to stem the spread of       chapters indicate that there was much to learn—in large
West Nile virus from birds to humans. And as this report    part because too many earlier lessons were ignored. We
goes to press, a new public health crisis is unfolding      are confident that related work by other individuals and




                                                                                                                        i n
around a meat packing plant in Aylmer, Ontario.             groups—including the Senate Standing Committee chaired
                                                            by the Hon. Michael Kirby, the expert panel in Ontario


                                                                                                                        H e a l t h
All these events have represented tangible threats to the   chaired by Dr. David Walker, and the public health
physical and economic well-being of Canadians. All          investigation by Mr. Justice Archie Campbell—will lead to
these threats emphasize the need for a seamless public      many lessons beyond those drawn here. Those ongoing
health system. At minimum, Canadians expect that the        assessments, however, must not be used by governments
nation’s public health systems should be fully prepared     as an excuse for inaction and delay.
                                                                                                                        P u b l i c



to deal with emergencies caused by infectious diseases,
accidental or intended, and consistently be able to         Before recapitulating the recommendations from earlier
protect them from mass contamination of water or food.      chapters, some themes and issues from the body of this
These minimal expectations are not being met.               report may be worthy of review.
                                                                                                                        o f
                                                                                                                        R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................                      211
                  .................................................................................................

                  Our first theme is that the single largest impediment to        Second, public health costs are modest—perhaps 2-3% of
                  dealing successfully with future public health crises is the    health spending, depending on how one defines numerators
                  lack of a collaborative framework and ethos among               and denominators. The actual amount of new federal
                  different levels of government. If the experience of SARS       spending that the Committee has recommended would
                  in Ontario were to be repeated in a jurisdiction with fewer     reach $700 million per annum by 2007. This is what
                  resources and a smaller base of highly-skilled and dedicated    F/P/T governments currently spend on personal health
                  personnel, or in the face of a more virulent infectious         services in Canada between Monday and Wednesday
                  disease, the consequences could be disastrous. Canadians        in a single week.
                  expect to see their governments collaborate responsibly in
                  the face of a serious threat to the health of the population.   Third, the Committee’s recommendations for new funding
                  The rules and norms for a seamless public health system         are oriented to supporting all jurisdictions. Until now,
                  must be sorted out in advance of a health emergency,            there have been no federal transfers earmarked for local
                  with a spirit of partnership and shared commitment to           and provincial/territorial [P/T] public health activities.
                  the health of the citizenry, not on an ad hoc basis in the      Public health has instead been competing against personal
                  midst of the battle to contain a viral outbreak.                health services for health dollars in provincial budgets,
                                                                                  even as the federal government has increasingly earmarked
                  Systems-based thinking and coordination of activity in a        its health transfers for specific health service priorities.
                  carefully-planned infrastructure are not just essential in a    About 75% of the new federal spending that we have
                  crisis; they are integral to core functions in public health    recommended will flow to support local and provincial/
                  because of its population-wide and preventive focus.            territorial public health activities. This includes
                  To repeat an observation from an earlier chapter: the           $300 million per annum for front-line public health
                  Committee does not seek to build public health systems          activities under the new Public Health Partnerships Program,
                  so perfect that people no longer need to be good. But we        $100 million per annum to support P/T purchase of costly
                  believe Canadians should demand a set of interlocking           new vaccines under a reinvigorated National Immunization
                  public health systems sufficiently strong that bad things       Strategy, and $100 million in a Communicable Disease
                  do not happen needlessly to good people. The case for a         Control Fund to support second-line defences at the P/T
                  collaborative and coordinated approach to public health         level and link P/T and federal centres of excellence in
                  is arguably even more acute than in our still-fragmented        surveillance, prevention, and containment of infectious
                  personal health services systems. Weakness in health            threats to health. Furthermore, the new Canadian
                  protection or disease control in one jurisdiction will          Agency for Public Health would make significant new
                  rapidly affect many other jurisdictions. To that end, the       investments in health human resources, research, and
                  Committee has recommended strategies that will strengthen       surveillance for non-communicable diseases—all of
                  all levels of the public health system as well as integrate     which will have direct benefits for P/T jurisdictions.
                  the components more fully with each other.
                                                                                  Fourth and finally, the fiscal and strategic approaches set
                  The Committee appreciates that F/P/T relations are not          out in this report are entirely consistent with international
                  straightforward in Canada (or any other federation). That,      precedents and, we believe, the expectations of Canadians.
                  in large part, is why we have proposed new structures           Similar programs of transfers for public health to states
                  and funding mechanisms that aim to remove public                and territories exist in Australia and also operate under
                  health from the jurisdictional cross-fire. The Committee        the auspices of the Centers for Disease Control and
                  nonetheless strongly urges current and future                   Prevention [CDC] in the USA. Public health authorities
                  governments to view public health as a ‘constructive-           in the European Community are building capacity to
                  engagement zone’ in F/P/T relations for several reasons.        coordinate health protection and facilitate networking
                                                                                  among national foci for disease control. With the
S A R S




                  First, public health threats have generalized impacts. The      globalization of health threats and growing importance
                  success of Ontario and British Columbia in containing           of international collaboration in disease control, the
                  SARS spared the rest of the country. We cannot afford to        Committee urges F/P/T governments to coalesce around
                  have any weak links in a pan-Canadian chain of health           public health as a pan-Canadian priority.
f r o m




                  protection and disease control.
                                                                                  We turn back now to the Committee’s recommendations.
L e a r n i n g




                  212       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

The first section consists of a series of recommendations
that require urgent attention by governments as part of
                                                              12A. Preparing for the Respiratory
preparation for the winter season and the associated               Virus Season
increases in the incidence of respiratory viral illnesses.
They are largely self-explanatory.                            As Canada recovers from SARS, preparations must begin
                                                              for the next respiratory virus season. SARS may or may
The sections thereafter recapitulate recommendations          not re-emerge; however, even if it does not, the public
presented in the body of the report. Arguments in support     health system and the health care system will be forced
of each recommendation were given in the relevant             to respond to many false alarms. While many of the
chapter. For brevity, we do not repeat the rationale for      initiatives needed to renew the public health system will
the recommendations or elaborate on them below.               require months or years of hard work, there are some
                                                              areas that, in the Committee’s view, require attention
While the Committee is providing its advice and recom-        over the next three months.
mendations to the federal Minister of Health, public
health broadly and health emergencies more specifically       • A national manual for the investigation and control
are national issues that require pan-Canadian collaboration     of SARS outbreaks should be completed. Parts of this
and involvement. No one level of government has sole            manual exist in Health Canada guidelines, and in
responsibility over all aspects of public health. And,          Ontario and British Columbia directives and guide-
given the roles and experiences of various Committee            lines. A coordinated and detailed package needs to be
members, we believed it would be a dereliction of               available to hospitals and public health units across
responsibility for us to focus very narrowly on federal         the country. Health Canada funding and a secretariat,
issues. Therefore, by necessity, we present recommendations     as well as P/T cooperation and collaboration, will
or sub-recommendations that apply to jurisdictions in           be necessary.
addition to or other than the federal government.             • In addition to a comprehensive technical manual for
                                                                outbreak containment, Health Canada should coor-
Among these are recommendations that deal with the              dinate the development of an educational package
personal health services sector and aspects of local public     about routine practices, SARS, and SARS surveillance
health arrangements where P/T jurisdiction is relatively        for the coming winter season that can be distributed
clear. Most of these were first set out in Chapter 8.           to hospitals, programs and institutions involved in
The information and evidence bearing on those recom-            educating health professionals, and various professional
mendations was carefully collected, albeit primarily from       associations and stakeholder groups for use in training
one large province. We repeat these recommendations in          front-line staff.




                                                                                                                           C a n a d a
the hope that they may be useful to all P/T jurisdictions.
                                                              • The F/P/T Conference of Deputy Ministers should
A further caveat is that many of the recommendations            immediately designate lead public health officials to
apply to public health broadly. Infectious diseases are an      develop guidelines for federal, provincial, local, and
essential piece of the public health puzzle, but cannot be      institutional roles and responsibilities during an
                                                                outbreak of SARS or similar agent. This work would




                                                                                                                           i n
addressed in isolation, particularly since in local health
units, the same personnel tend to respond to both infec-        be antecedent to more comprehensive and longer-
tious and non-infectious threats to community health.           term development of intergovernmental agreements


                                                                                                                           H e a l t h
Furthermore, the success of health emergency planning           on public health roles and responsibilities. It should
and outbreak management is dependent upon a broad               specify the roles of institutions and various levels of
and solid public health foundation. Implementation of           government in both domestic and international
these recommendations should therefore greatly enhance          elements of responding to SARS.
the capacity of Canada’s public health systems to respond     • Real-time alert systems for SARS and similar respiratory
                                                                                                                           P u b l i c



to infectious diseases or other health emergencies, while       illnesses need to be created and coordinated. This
simultaneously renewing the general public health               includes: mechanisms for rapid reporting of activity
infrastructure and its ability to protect and improve the       within Canada to Health Canada, mechanisms for infor-
health of Canadians.                                            ming Canadians rapidly of developments in other juris-
                                                                dictions, and mechanisms for prompt communication
                                                                                                                           o f




                                                                of the evolving scientific data from Canada and other
                                                                parts of the world. The alert systems must extend to
                                                                                                                           R e n e w a l




                                                                all health care facilities and, to the greatest extent
                                                                possible, should also reach primary care providers.


..........................................................................................                          213
                  .................................................................................................

                  • National recommendations on surveillance for SARS          • Health Canada should coordinate an open scientific
                    should ideally be completed by mid-October. Primary          meeting late in the Fall, with objectives that include:
                    care providers require guidelines for assessment and         updating Canadians on the science of SARS, discussing
                    referral of respiratory illnesses, given the high volume     plans for SARS surveillance for the winter season,
                    of such patients in their offices during the winter          and reviewing the roles of travel advisories and
                    months. Definitive diagnoses will generally be made in       passenger screening.
                    emergency departments and hospitals. Hence, for
                    clarity of responsibility, surveillance planning should
                    be led by the Nosocomial and Occupational Infections
                                                                               12B. Recommendations for
                    Section within the Centre for Infectious Disease                Renewal of Public Health
                    Prevention and Control [CIDPC] with input from
                    other key divisions. The surveillance strategy should
                                                                                    in Canada
                    include recommendations for appropriate laboratory
                                                                               12B.1 New structures for Public Health
                    testing for SARS and other viral pathogens, a manual
                    of definitions and procedures, and a software program      • The Government of Canada should move promptly
                    for data entry at the hospital level for reporting to        to establish a Canadian Agency for Public Health, a
                    local public health units.                                   legislated service agency, and given it the appropriate
                                                                                 and consolidated authorities necessary to provide
                  • The National Microbiology Laboratory, through the
                                                                                 leadership and action on public health matters, such
                    Canadian Public Health Laboratory Network, should
                                                                                 as national disease outbreaks and emergencies, with
                    establish guidelines for the necessary laboratory
                                                                                 or without additional authorities regarding national
                    capacity across the country. Provincial ministries of
                                                                                 disease surveillance capacity.
                    health should coordinate provincial and hospital
                    laboratory resources to ensure that adequate capacity      • The Government of Canada should ensure that the
                    for SARS and other viral testing is available by mid-        scope of the Agency’s mandate covers public health
                    November, and that clinicians are educated as to what        broadly with appropriate linkages to other government
                    specimens are needed, how they should be sent, and           departments and agencies engaged in public health
                    the timeframe for reporting of results.                      activities. The Government’s scoping exercise for the
                                                                                 new Agency must be informed by a careful review of
                  • Health Canada should work ahead of the Health
                                                                                 public health service provision and health promotion
                    Emergency Response Team [HERT] framework to create,
                                                                                 for First Nations and Inuit Canadians.
                    organize, and resource two national epidemic response
                    teams. Their roles, responsibilities and reporting         • The architects of the new Canadian Agency for Public
                    structure need to be negotiated with the provinces           Health should ensure that its structure follows a hub
                    and territories, with due consideration given to the         and spoke model whereby links are made to existing
                    needs and responsibilities of the local public health        regional centres with particular strengths in public
                    units and other institutions or agencies that the teams      health specializations while some other functions and
                    would be sent to assist.                                     new ones are devolved to other regions of the country,
                                                                                 with a vision that these parts support the entire system.
                  • A full research evaluation and publication of the effec-
                    tiveness of passenger screening on the detection of        • The Government of Canada should create the
                    ‘importation and exportation’ of SARS should be              position of Chief Public Health Officer of Canada.
                    completed as soon as possible. Health Canada should          The Canadian Agency for Public Health should be
                    share these results with other jurisdictions that are        headed by the Chief Public Health Officer of Canada
                    performing passenger screening antecedent to the             who would report directly to the federal Minister of
S A R S




                    multilateral dialogue on passenger screening                 Health and serve as the leading national voice for
                    recommended below.                                           public health, particularly in outbreaks and other
                                                                                 health emergencies.
                  • International technical liaison offices, at a minimum
                    with the World Health Organization [WHO] and the           • The Government of Canada should create the
f r o m




                    US CDC, should be established for the National               National Public Health Advisory Board, and ensure
                    Microbiology Laboratory and the CIDPC. Protocols             that nominations of board members come forward
                    for the exchange of liaison officers during epidemics        through provincial and territorial as well as federal
                    must be negotiated.                                          channels. The mandate of the Board will be to advise
L e a r n i n g




                                                                                 the Chief Public Health Officer of Canada on the
                                                                                 development and implementation of a truly
                                                                                 pan-Canadian public health strategy.

                  214       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

• The F/P/T Conference of Deputy Ministers of Health             outbreak management, and related infection control
  should initiate a new Network for Communicable                 activities, including the sponsorship of a new F/P/T
  Disease Control that would link F/P/T activities in            network. Initial allocations from this Fund should be
  infectious disease surveillance, prevention, and manage-       made to facilitate immediate preparedness for a
  ment. This initiative should be started as soon as             possible return of SARS to Canada during the winter
  possible, and integrated with the existing F/P/T Network       season of respiratory illnesses and influenza.
  for Emergency Preparedness and Response.
• The Canadian Agency for Public Health should create         12B.3 National Public Health Strategy
  a Public Health Ethics Working Group to develop an          • The Canadian Agency for Public Health should play a
  ethical framework to guide public health systems and          catalytic role in developing a National Public Health
  health care organizations during emergency public             Strategy in collaboration with provincial and terri-
  health situations such as infectious disease outbreaks.       torial governments and in consultation with a full
  In addition to the usual ethical issues, the Working          range of non-governmental stakeholders. The new
  Group should develop guidelines for collaboration             Strategy should delineate priorities and goals for key
  and co-authorship with fair apportioning of authorship        categories of public health activity along with
  and related credit to academic participants in outbreak       provisions for public reporting across jurisdictions of
  investigation and related research, and develop templates     progress towards achieving goals.
  for expedited ethics reviews of applied research
  protocols in the face of outbreaks and similar public       • The Government of Canada should incorporate into
  health emergencies.                                           the new Agency the current grants and contributions
                                                                programs of the Population and Public Health Branch
                                                                of Health Canada. These grants and contributions
12B.2 New Funding for Public Health
                                                                should be reviewed and their uses aligned with the
• The Government of Canada should budget for increases          National Public Health Strategy and made complemen-
  in core functions of the new Canadian Agency for              tary to the Public Health Partnerships Program.
  Public Health that will rise, over the next 3 to 5 years,
  to a target of $200 million per annum in incremental        12B.4 Emergency Planning, Outbreak
  funding beyond that already spent on core federal                 Management and Crisis
  public health functions.
                                                                    Communications
• The Government of Canada should fund a new Public
                                                              • The F/P/T Network for Emergency Preparedness and
  Health Partnerships Program under the auspices of the




                                                                                                                           C a n a d a
                                                                Response, in collaboration with the new F/P/T Network
  Canadian Agency for Public Health. The Agency would
                                                                for Communicable Disease Control, should urgently
  thereby provide program funding to provinces and
                                                                move ahead with the development of a comprehensive
  territories to strengthen their public health programming
                                                                approach to managing public health emergencies
  in agreed areas and in support of the National Public
                                                                through a pan-Canadian system that includes:
  Health Strategy. The funding for the Public Health
  Partnerships Program should rise over 2-3 years to             – harmonizing emergency preparedness and response




                                                                                                                           i n
  $300 million/annum.                                              frameworks at the federal, provincial and territorial
                                                                   levels;


                                                                                                                           H e a l t h
• Through the Canadian Agency for Public Health,
  the Government of Canada should invest                         – developing seamless planning and response capacities
  $100 million/annum within 12 to 18 months to                     as envisaged by the 31 recommendations of the
  realize the National Immunization Strategy whereby               Special Task Force on Emergency Preparedness
  the federal government would purchase agreed-upon                and Response;
  new vaccines to meet provincial and territorial needs
                                                                                                                           P u b l i c



                                                                 – building an integrated F/P/T planning, training and
  and support a consolidated information system to
                                                                   exercising platform for responding to all-hazard
  track vaccinations and immunization coverage.
                                                                   disasters, including public health emergencies
• Under the aegis of the new Canadian Agency for                   created by large scale disease outbreaks;
  Public Health, the Government of Canada should
                                                                 – developing and applying a common set of principles,
                                                                                                                           o f




  budget for a Communicable Disease Control Fund,
                                                                   concepts and capabilities for large scale disease
  allocating a sum rising over 2-3 years to $100 million
                                                                   outbreaks; and
                                                                                                                           R e n e w a l




  per annum in support of provincial, territorial, and
  regional capacity for infectious disease surveillance,         – creating the requisite linkages to major employers,
                                                                   the travel and hotel industry, and relevant NGOs.

..........................................................................................                          215
                  .................................................................................................

                  • Health Canada in collaboration with provincial/               surveillance of infectious diseases and response to
                    territorial jurisdictions should lead the development         outbreaks. (This work dovetails with the above-noted
                    of a national legislative and policy framework for a          SARS surveillance initiative for the Fall of 2003). The
                    measured, harmonized, and unified response to public          business processes for infectious disease surveillance
                    health emergencies.                                           would be extended over time with support from the
                                                                                  Agency’s Centre for Surveillance Coordination and the
                  • As part of Health Canada’s legislative renewal process
                                                                                  Public Health Partnerships Program, to a national
                    currently underway, the Government of Canada should
                                                                                  system for non-communicable diseases and population
                    consider incorporating in legislation a mechanism for
                                                                                  health factors.
                    dealing with health emergencies which would be
                    activated in lockstep with provincial emergency acts       • The Government of Canada should seek the establish-
                    in the event of a pan-Canadian health emergency.             ment of a working group under the auspices of the
                                                                                 Canada Health Infoway Incorporated and Health
                  • F/P/T governments should develop and provide
                                                                                 Canada and/or the new Canadian Agency for Public
                    training programs and tools to support local public
                                                                                 Health, to focus specifically on the needs of public
                    health units and institutions in systematically
                                                                                 health infostructure and potential investments to
                    developing, implementing, and evaluating crisis and
                                                                                 enhance disease surveillance and link public health
                    emergency risk communication strategies.
                                                                                 and clinical information systems.
                  • The F/P/T Conference of Deputy Ministers of Health
                    should support the continued activity of the F/P/T         12B.6 Clarifying the Legislative and
                    Network for Emergency Preparedness and Response                  Regulatory Context
                    with a view to enhanced surge capacities in all
                    jurisdictions, including:                                  • The Government of Canada should launch an urgent
                                                                                 and comprehensive review of the application of the
                     – developing an integrated risk assessment capability
                                                                                 Protection of Information Privacy and Electronic
                       for public health emergency response;
                                                                                 Documents Act to the health sector, with a view to
                     – assessing the National Emergency Stockpile System         setting out regulations that would clarify the applica-
                       [NESS] to optimize its role in supporting the             bility of this new law to the health sector, and/or creating
                       response to large-scale disease outbreaks; and            new privacy legislation specific to health matters.

                     – developing and funding the Health Emergency             • The Government of Canada should launch a compre-
                       Response Team concept, including a psychosocial           hensive review of the treatment of personal health
                       response component, as a practical, flexible              information under the Privacy Act, with a view to
                       mechanism for addressing the need for human               setting out regulations or legislation specific to the
                       resource surge capacity.                                  health sector.
                                                                               • The Government of Canada should embark on a time-
                  12B.5 Surveillance/Data Gathering                              limited intergovernmental initiative with a view to
                        and Dissemination                                        renewing the legislative framework for disease surveil-
                                                                                 lance and outbreak management in Canada, as well as
                  • The Canadian Agency for Public Health, in partnership
                                                                                 harmonizing emergency legislation as it bears on
                    with the new F/P/T Network for Communicable Disease
                                                                                 public health emergencies.
                    Control, should give priority to infectious disease
                    surveillance, including provision of technical advice      • In the event that a coordinated system of rules for
                    and funding to provincial/territorial jurisdictions and      infectious disease surveillance and outbreak management
                    programs to support training of personnel required to        cannot be established by the combined effects of the
S A R S




                    implement surveillance programs. The Agency should           F/P/T Network for Communicable Disease Control,
                    facilitate the longer-term development of a compre-          the Public Health Partnerships Program, and the
                    hensive and national public health surveillance system       above-referenced intergovernmental legislative review,
                    that will collect, analyze, and disseminate laboratory       the Government of Canada should initiate the
f r o m




                    and health care facility data on infectious diseases and     drafting of default legislation to set up such a system
                    non-infectious diseases to relevant stakeholders.            of rules, clarifying F/P/T interactions as regards
                                                                                 public health matters with specific reference to
                  • Assuming some lag time to inception of a new Agency
                                                                                 infectious diseases.
L e a r n i n g




                    or F/P/T Network, Health Canada and the provinces
                    and territories should urgently commence a process to
                    arrive at business process agreements for collaborative


                  216       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


12B.7 Renewing Laboratory Infrastructure                       • Health Canada, in collaboration with provincial/
                                                                 territorial authorities, should sponsor a process that
• The F/P/T Conference of Deputy Ministers of Health             will lead to a shared vision for the development,
  should urgently launch an expedited review to ensure           incorporation, and evaluation of leading-edge
  that the public health laboratories in Canada have the         technology in the public health laboratory system.
  appropriate capacity and protocols to respond effectively      Among the issues that require elucidation are the role
  and collaboratively to the next serious outbreak of infec-     of national systems for the real-time surveillance of
  tious disease. The review could be initiated through           infectious disease through molecular fingerprinting of
  the Canadian Public Health Laboratory Network and              micro-organisms, toxicology capacity to detect
  engage with the new F/P/T Network for Communicable             illnesses caused by the poisoning of natural
  Disease Control as soon as the latter is operational.          environments and occupational hazards, and the
• Health Canada, in collaboration with the relevant              potential for linking genetic testing and infectious
  provincial/territorial authorities, should urgently            disease surveillance in novel programs that would
  initiate the development of a laboratory information           target cofactors associated with the development of
  system capable of meeting the information management           chronic diseases.
  needs of a major outbreak or epidemic. The laboratory        • A national report card of performance and gap assess-
  information system must be designed in such a way              ment for public health laboratories should be developed
  as to address the functional needs of laboratories, be         through the Canadian Public Health Laboratory
  readily integrated with epidemiologic information,             Network and/or the F/P/T Network for Communicable
  and be aligned with data-sharing agreements across             Disease Control, allowing comparative profiling of
  jurisdictions and institutions.                                various provincial and national laboratories against
• The F/P/T Conference of Deputy Ministers of Health             international standards.
  should launch a full review of the role of laboratories
  in national infectious disease surveillance systems,         12B.8 Building Research Capacity
  with the aim of creating a more efficient, timely, and
                                                               • The Canadian Agency for Public Health should
  integrated platform for use of both public and private
                                                                 earmark substantial funding to augment national
  laboratories in surveillance.
                                                                 capacity for research into epidemiologic and laboratory
• The Government of Canada, through the Canadian                 aspects of emerging infectious diseases and other
  Agency for Public Health, should invest in the                 threats to population health. This enhanced national
  expansion of the Canadian Public Health Laboratory             public health science capacity should be strongly linked
                                                                 to academic health institutions through co-location,




                                                                                                                            C a n a d a
  Network to integrate hospital and community-based
  laboratories. This includes alignment of incentives            joint venture research institutes, cross appointments,
  and clarification of roles and responsibilities for            joint recruitment, interchange, networks and collabo-
  infectious disease control. The relevant monies could          rative research activities.
  flow from the Public Health Partnerships Program or
                                                               • The Canadian Agency for Public Health, in partnership
  the Communicable Disease Control Fund.
                                                                 with provincial/territorial governments and through




                                                                                                                            i n
• The Canadian Agency for Public Health should give              the F/P/T Network for Communicable Disease Control,
  priority to strengthening the capacity of provincial/          should directly invest in provincial, territorial, and


                                                                                                                            H e a l t h
  territorial laboratories as regards testing for infectious     regional public health science capacity.
  diseases. The Agency should provide incentives to
                                                               • The F/P/T Network for Communicable Disease Control,
  increase the participation of provincial public health
                                                                 in partnership with the CIHR and the Canadian
  laboratories in national programs. It should support
                                                                 research community, should develop clear protocols
  provincial/territorial public health laboratories in the
                                                                 for leadership and coordination of future epidemic
                                                                                                                            P u b l i c



  creation of provincial laboratory networks equivalent
                                                                 research responses.
  to the Canadian Public Health Laboratory Network;
  these would connect in turn to the national network.         • The Canadian Agency for Public Health and the F/P/T
  The relevant monies would flow from the                        Network for Communicable Disease Control should
  Communicable Disease Control Fund.                             ensure that epidemic response teams initiated as part
                                                                                                                            o f




                                                                 of the Health Emergency Response Team [HERT]
• The Canadian Agency for Public Health should support
                                                                 concept, provide not only surge capacity for outbreak
  participation and leadership in international laboratory
                                                                                                                            R e n e w a l




                                                                 containment per se, but also a mobile “B-team” and
  networks by our national laboratories, thereby building
                                                                 investigative infrastructure, including epidemiologists,
  on the success of the international collaboration in
                                                                 programmers, and analysts.
  the response to SARS.

..........................................................................................                          217
                  .................................................................................................

                  • The Canadian Agency for Public Health, in partnership          fields where there are shortfalls in workforces (e.g.,
                    with provincial/territorial governments, should                community medicine physicians, field epidemiolo-
                    develop clear rules, reinforced by intergovernmental           gists, infection control practitioners, public health
                    agreements, on the sharing of information, the                 nursing, and others).
                    establishment of national databases, and the use of
                                                                                • The Canadian Agency for Public Health should develop
                    biologic materials for research in response to epidemics.
                                                                                  a National Public Health Service, with a variety of career
                  • The Canadian Agency for Public Health, in collaboration       paths and opportunities for Canadians interested in
                    with the CIHR, should establish a task force on emerging      public health. The National Public Health Service
                    infectious diseases to recommend research priorities          should include an extensive program of secondments
                    and funding mechanisms. The Agency, in collaboration          to and from provincial/territorial and local health
                    with the CIHR and other national research funding             agencies, with arrangements for mutual recognition of
                    bodies, should support the development of special             seniority and a range of collaborative opportunities
                    funding mechanisms and processes for fast-tracking            for advancement.
                    research related to epidemics of infectious diseases.       • Educational institutions, in collaboration with teaching
                  • The Canadian Agency for Public Health, in partnership         hospitals as applicable, should develop contingency
                    with research agencies and provincial/territorial             plans to limit the adverse impact on their students
                    governments, should work with universities to improve         and trainees from infectious disease outbreaks, while
                    research training opportunities in infectious diseases        maximizing learning opportunities from these events.
                    and outbreak management for the full range of involved        These plans should include communications, education
                    disciplines. This capacity-building focus should be a         regarding infection control, preparedness with
                    priority within the broader health human resource             appropriate protective gear, guidelines for support of
                    strategy of the Agency.                                       students/trainees in quarantine or work-and-home
                                                                                  isolation, strategies to limit the impact of impeded
                  • The Government of Canada should strengthen its                access to usual teaching and research sites, and
                    R&D functions in international health outreach, with          guidelines for the involvement of students in the care
                    particular emphasis on emerging infectious diseases           of patients with serious infectious conditions.
                    on a global basis.
                  • The Government of Canada should foster workable             12B.10 International Issues
                    public-private partnerships with the biotechnology,         • The Government of Canada should take the lead,
                    information technology, and pharmaceutical industries         along with an international consortium of committed
                    for shared research interests in the realm of emerging        partners, in the detection of global emerging diseases
                    infectious diseases, including new vaccines, antiviral        and outbreaks. This should be done through enhance-
                    compounds, immunotherapies, and diagnostic                    ments to the Global Public Health Intelligence Network
                    technology.                                                   and similar programs.
                                                                                • The Canadian Agency for Public Health should have a
                  12B.9 Renewing Human Resources for
                                                                                  mandate for greater engagement internationally in
                        Public Health                                             the emerging infectious disease field, including the
                  • Health Canada should engage provincial/territorial            initiation of projects to build capacity for surveillance
                    departments/ministries of health in immediate discus-         and outbreak management in developing countries.
                    sions around the initiation of a national strategy for      • The Canadian Agency for Public Health should be the
                    the renewal of human resources in public health. This         institution responsible for direct communication with
                    F/P/T strategy should be developed in concert with a
S A R S




                                                                                  the World Health Organization, the US CDC, and
                    wide range of non-governmental partners, and include          other international organizations and jurisdictions.
                    funding mechanisms to support public health human             The Agency should disseminate within Canada infor-
                    resource development on a continuing basis.                   mation received from international organizations and
                                                                                  jurisdictions on global health threats, and in turn, it
f r o m




                  • Health Canada should catalyze this strategy by urgently
                    exploring opportunities to create and support training        would inform the World Health Organization and other
                    positions and programs in various public health-related       jurisdictions of relevant Canadian events. During out-
                                                                                  break situations, the Agency would perform the role of
L e a r n i n g




                                                                                  liaising between Canadian and international organiza-
                                                                                  tions and jurisdictions to maximize mutual learning.




                  218       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................

• The Government of Canada should review its travel                officials, response agencies, ports, airports and the
  screening techniques and protocols with a view to                relevant companies in the shipping and airline
  ensuring that travel screening measures are based on             industries.
  evidence for public health effectiveness, while taking
  into account the financial and human resources                12B.11 Clinical and Local Public Health
  required for their implementation and sustained                      Issues
  operation. The Government of Canada should also
  initiate a multilateral dialogue with other nations that      • F/P/T departments/ministries of health should facilitate
  are currently engaged in SARS travel screening to               a dialogue with health care workers, their unions/
  determine whether and when some or all of these                 associations, professional regulatory bodies, experts in
  measures should be modified or discontinued.                    employment law and ethics, and other pertinent
                                                                  government departments/ministries concerning duties
• The Government of Canada should seek the support of
                                                                  of care toward persons with contagious illnesses and
  international partners to launch a multilateral process
                                                                  countervailing rights to refuse dangerous duties in
  under the auspices of the World Health Organization
                                                                  health care settings.
  that would set agreed-upon standards of evidence for
  the issuance of travel advisories and alerts by member        • The CEOs of hospitals and health regions should
  states. The multilateral process should also seek to            ensure that there is a formal Regional Infectious
  determine the role of WHO in issuing travel advice,             Disease Network that can design and oversee implemen-
  and to establish a procedure for providing advance              tation of hospital strategies for responding to outbreaks
  notice for possible alerts and advice. The notice               of infectious disease. These Networks should map out
  process should provide a mechanism for consultation             programs of hospital surveillance for infectious diseases
  with and a response by the target country.                      that cross-link institutions and connect in turn to a
                                                                  national surveillance program so as to integrate
• The Government of Canada should ensure that an
                                                                  hospital and community-based information.
  adequate complement of quarantine officers is main-
  tained at airports and other ports of entry, as required.     • As part of its activities, the F/P/T Network for Emergency
  Fully trained and informed quarantine officers should           Preparedness and Response should examine provincial
  be available at airports to deal with health threats, to        and federal emergency measures with a view to ensuring
  provide information to and educate airport staff, customs       that all emergency plans include a clear hierarchy of
  officials, and airline personnel concerning the recognition     response mechanisms ranging from the response of a
  of illness and measures to be taken to contain risk.            single ministry to a response from the entire govern-
  Close collaboration with airport authorities and airline        ment, with appropriate cross-linkages.




                                                                                                                                 C a n a d a
  personnel to clarify responsibilities in the event of a
                                                                • Provincial/territorial ministries and departments of
  health threat is necessary.
                                                                  health should ensure that emergency plans include
• The Government of Canada should ensure that                     provisions for appropriate compensation of those
  incoming and outgoing passengers are provided with              individuals required to respond to and those affected
  health information about where and when health                  by an emergency.




                                                                                                                                 i n
  threats exist, including any precautionary measures to
                                                                • Provincial/territorial ministries and departments of
  take, how to identify symptoms of the disease, and
                                                                  health should revise their statutes and regulations to


                                                                                                                                 H e a l t h
  what first steps to take in case of suspected infection.
                                                                  require that every hospital or health region has formal-
  A partnership with the travel industry would facilitate
                                                                  ized and updated protocols for outbreak management.
  this process so that information could be provided at
                                                                  These plans must include mechanisms for getting
  the time of bookings. The current Health Canada web
                                                                  information and supplies to those outside the
  site containing information for travelers should be
                                                                  institutional sector, such as primary care physicians,
                                                                                                                                 P u b l i c


  made more prominent and its existence promoted.
                                                                  ambulance personnel/paramedics, and community
• All federal/provincial/territorial/municipal response plans     care providers.
  should include port/cruiseship- and airport/airplane-
                                                                • The CEO of each hospital or health region should
  specific protocols for infectious diseases as well as
                                                                  ensure that each hospital’s protocol for outbreak
  protocols for employee protection guidelines and
                                                                  management incorporates an understanding of the
                                                                                                                                 o f




  decontamination of aircraft, ships, and/or facilities.
                                                                  hospital’s interrelationships with local and provincial
  Jurisdictional issues concerning travel and health need
                                                                  public health authorities.
                                                                                                                                 R e n e w a l




  to be resolved through the plan. The plan should be
  developed with input and buy-in from local health


..........................................................................................                                 219
                  .................................................................................................

                  • The CEO and relevant clinical chiefs of each hospital          • Provincial/territorial ministries and departments of
                    or health region should ensure that there is continuing          health should engage the Canadian Council for
                    education for hospital staff, particularly front-line health     Health Services Accreditation to work with appropriate
                    care workers, to enhance awareness of outbreak/                  stakeholders to strengthen infection control standards,
                    infectious disease issues and institutional/clinical             surveyor guidelines and tools that are applicable to
                    infection control.                                               emergency services as well as outbreak management
                                                                                     within health care institutions. The standards should
                  • Provincial/territorial ministries and departments of
                                                                                     also include descriptors of the appropriate expertise
                    health should ensure that all key health leaders are
                    trained in crisis communications. Hospital and health            required to maintain hospital infection control.
                    region CEOs in turn should ensure that clinical
                    leaders and key administrators are also trained in crisis      12C. Postscript
                    communications and that the organization has a clear
                    cut protocol for providing all relevant information to         The SARS story as it unfolded in Canada had both tragic
                    staff and hearing their concerns in a timely, respectful,      and heroic elements. The toll of the epidemic was
                    and participatory fashion.                                     substantial, but thousands in the health field rose to the
                                                                                   occasion and ultimately contained the SARS outbreak in
                  • Provincial/territorial ministries and departments of
                                                                                   this country. The Committee emphasizes that in drawing
                    health should require through regulation and provide
                                                                                   lessons from the SARS outbreak, our intent has been not
                    funding to ensure that emergency departments have
                                                                                   to ‘name, shame, and blame’ individuals, but rather to
                    the physical facilities to isolate, contain and manage
                                                                                   move and improve systems that were suboptimal. The
                    incidents of infectious disease. Emergency departments
                                                                                   challenge now is to ensure not only that we are better
                    should also be equipped with appropriate infostructure
                                                                                   prepared for the next epidemic, but that public health in
                    to enable their participation in infectious disease
                                                                                   Canada is broadly renewed so as to protect and promote
                    surveillance networks, including receipt of all necessary
                    national and international alerts.                             the health of all our citizens. It is to these latter ends that
                                                                                   the Committee’s recommendations have been offered.
                  • Provincial/territorial ministries and departments of           We believe the recommendations represent a reasonably
                    health should provide the necessary funding for                comprehensive and affordable starting point for strength-
                    renovation to achieve minimal facility standards for           ening and integrating public health at all levels in Canada.
                    infection control in emergency departments.                    As our colleagues in government contemplate these
                  • Provincial/territorial ministries and departments of           recommendations, the Committee commends to them
                    health should ensure that each hospital has sufficient         the vision of Benjamin Disraeli (1804-1881) who, on
                    negative pressure rooms for treatment of patients with         introducing his Public Health Act to British Parliament
                    infectious disease.                                            in 1875, remarked that public health was the foundation
                                                                                   for “the happiness of the people and the power of the
                  • Provincial/territorial ministries and departments of           country. The care of the public health is the first duty of
                    health should ensure that, for emergency situations, at        a statesman.” Less eloquently, the Committee in closing
                    least one hospital in each ‘region’ of a province/territory    repeats the simple question we put earlier to all health
                    has sufficient facilities and other infrastructure to          ministers, finance ministers, and first ministers: If not
                    serve as a regional centre to anchor the response to           now, after SARS, when?
                    outbreaks of infectious disease.
                  • Provincial/territorial ministries and departments of
                    health should ensure that systems are developed to
                    ensure that providers and the public receive timely,
S A R S




                    accurate and consistent information and directives
                    during an outbreak of infectious disease.
                  • Public health managers and facility/regional health
                    authority CEOs, in collaboration with relevant unions,
f r o m




                    professional associations and individuals, should create
                    a process/mechanism to include front-line public health
                    and health care workers in advance planning to prepare
                    for related to outbreaks of infectious diseases and other
L e a r n i n g




                    health emergencies. Occupational health and safety
                    issues should be given prominence in this process.



                  220       .........................................................................................
                                SARS and Public Health
Appendix 1




INTERVIEWS AND SUBMISSIONS
.................................................................................................



As part of the Committee’s fact finding phase, it conducted       groups an opportunity to relay their experiences with
interviews with front-line health care providers and              SARS, the lessons they learned from the outbreak, and
administrators, as well as personnel from various                 their views on how the public health system needs
organizations and levels of government involved in                to be improved.
managing the SARS outbreak. The Committee also put
out a call for submissions to health care associations,           The following are lists of individuals that were interviewed
non-governmental organizations, and relevant industry             and submissions that were received.
stakeholders. The call for submissions offered these



  I   N T E R V I E W S

  Interviewee                         Affiliation                                                        Date

  Dr. Ian Johnson                     Dept. of Public Health Sciences, UofT                              June 3

  Dr. Mary Vearncombe                 Director, Infection Control, SWCHSC                                June 6




                                                                                                                                 C a n a d a
  Dr. Anita Rachlis                   Infectious Disease Consultant, SWCHSC
  Dr. Andrew Simor                    Infectious Disease Consultant, SWCHSC

  Prof. Sujit Choudhry                Faculty of Law, UofT                                               June 13

  Prof. Harvey Skinner                Dept. of Public Health Sciences, UofT                              June 16




                                                                                                                                 i n
  Dr. Mark Cheung                     General Internal Medicine, SWCHSC                                  June 16



                                                                                                                                 H e a l t h
  Mr. Doug Hunt                       Counsel to Public Health Investigation                             June 17,
  Mr. Justice Archie Campbell         Investigator under the Public Health Act                           July 11,
                                                                                                         August 18

  Mr. Frank Lussing                   CEO York Central Hospital                                          June 18
                                      (Committee member)
                                                                                                                                 P u b l i c



  Mr. Malcolm Moffatt                 CEO St. John’s Rehabilitation

  Dr. Ronn Goldberg                   Radiologist-in-chief, North York                                   June 19
                                      General Hospital
                                                                                                                                 o f




  Ms. Janet Beed                      VP, COO – Toronto General Hospital                                 June 20
  Ms. Janet Davidson                  President, Toronto East General
                                                                                                                                 R e n e w a l




  Dr. Raziel Gershater                Radiologist, North York General Hospital                           June 24



..........................................................................................                               221
                  .................................................................................................


                   Interviewee                    Affiliation                                        Date

                   Mr. Bill Tholl                 CEO, CMA                                           June 24
                   Dr. Dana Hanson                President, CMA
                   Dr. Isra Levy                  Director of Public Health, CMA

                   Dr. Denise Werker              WHO CDS, Geneva                                    June 25,
                   Dr. Arlene King                Director of Immunization and Respiratory           June 26
                                                  Diseases, Population and Public
                                                  Health Branch, Health Canada

                   Ms. Pegeen Walsh               Special Advisor to Regional Director General       June 25
                                                  Health Canada-Ontario/Nunavut Region

                   Dr. Bob Lester                 Executive VP - SWCHSC                              June 25

                   Dr. James Young                Commissioner of Public Safety                      June 26

                   Dr. Rob Horvath                Assistant Director, Emergency Services,
                                                  North York General Hospital                        July 1

                   Dr. John Frank                 Scientific Director, Institute for Population      July 2
                                                  and Public Health, CIHR

                   Dr. David Mowat                Director-General of the Centre for                 July 3
                                                  Surveillance Coordination, Population
                                                  and Public Health Branch, Health Canada

                   Dr. Don Low                    Microbiologist-in-Chief, Mt. Sinai Hospital        July 3
                   Dr. Allison McGeer             Director, Infection Control, Mt. Sinai Hospital
                                                  (Committee member)

                   Dr. Richard Schabas            Chief of Staff, York Central Hospital              July 3

                   Dr. Colin D’Cunha              Commissioner of Public Health, OMHLTC              July 7

                   Dr. Kumanan Wilson             General Internal Medicine, UHN & Institute         July 7
                                                  of Intergovernmental Relations,
                                                  Queen’s University

                   Mr. Gerry Dafoe                CEO, CPHA                                          July 8
                   Dr. David Mowat                Health Canada

                   Ms. Gail Paech                 Assistant Deputy Minister - Long-term Care,        July 8
                                                  OMHLTC
                   Mr. Phil Jackson               Director, Health Information and
                                                  Science Branch, OMHLTC
S A R S




                   Dr. Paul Gully                 Senior Director General, Population                July 9
                                                  and Public Health Branch, Health Canada

                   Dr. Mona Loutfy                Infectious Disease Consultant, SWCHSC/             July 10
                                                  North York General
f r o m




                   Mr. Tom Closson                CEO, UHN                                           July 11
                   Dr. Michael Gardham            Director, Infection Control, UHN
                   Ms. Gillian Howard             VP Public Affairs, UHN
L e a r n i n g




                  222       .........................................................................................
.................................................................................................


 Interviewee                          Affiliation                                Date

 Dr. Bill Sibbald                     Physician in Chief, SWCHSC                 July 11

 Dr. Phillip Ellison                  Family Medicine, UHN                       July 15

 Dr. Barbara Mederski                 Director of Infection Control,             July 15
                                      North York General Hospital

 Ms. Bonnie Adamson                   CEO, North York General Hospital           July 23

 Ms. Bonnie Adamson                   CEO, North York General Hospital           July 31
 Dr. Keith Rose                       VP - Medical Affairs,
                                      North York General Hospital




Submissions
Association of Canadians Academic Health Care Organizations
Association of Nursing Directors and Supervisors of Ontario Health Agencies
British Columbia Ministry of Health Planning
Canada’s Research-Based Pharmaceutical Companies
Canadian Association of Emergency Physicians
Canadian Association of Medical Microbiologists
Canadian Coordinating Office for Health Technology Assessment
Canadian Council on Health Services Accreditation
Canadian Federation of Nurses Unions




                                                                                                    C a n a d a
Canadian Healthcare Association
Canadian Hospital Epidemiology Committee
Canadian Infectious Disease Society
Canadian Institutes of Health Research




                                                                                                    i n
Canadian Medical Association



                                                                                                    H e a l t h
Canadian Pharmacists Association
Canadian Public Health Association
Canadian Society for Medical Laboratory Science
Catholic Health Association of Canada
                                                                                                    P u b l i c



Community and Hospital Infection Control Association of Canada
Council of Chief Medical Officers of Health
Greater Toronto Airports Authority
                                                                                                    o f
                                                                                                    R e n e w a l




..........................................................................................   223
                  .................................................................................................

                  Group of Nine National Associations1
                  National Specialty Society for Community Medicine
                  Ontario Association of Medical Laboratories
                  Ontario Council of Teaching Hospitals
                  Ontario Hospital Association
                  Ontario Medical Association
                  Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada
                  Vancouver International Airport Authority
                  VIA Rail Canada
                  Victorian Order of Nurses
S A R S
f r o m
L e a r n i n g




                  1 Canadian Medical Association, the Canadian Public Health Association, the Canadian Nurses Association, the Canadian Healthcare Association,
                    the Canadian Dental Association, the Association of Canadian Academic Healthcare Organizations, the Canadian Pharmacists Association,
                    the Canadian Association of Emergency Physicians, and the Canadian Council on Health Services Accreditation.



                  224         .........................................................................................
                                                   Order Code RL32072




                  CRS Report for Congress
                                      Received through the CRS Web




   Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS):
                   The International Response




                                                September 8, 2003



                                                 (name redacted)
                                             Foreign Affairs Analyst
                                                     Tiaji Salaam
                                           Foreign Affairs Analyst
                     Foreign Affairs, Defense, and Trade Division




Congressional Research Service ˜ The Library of Congress
       Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS):
               The International Response

Summary

      Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), a new highly infectious disease,
was first identified by the World Health Organization (WHO) in February 2003.
While the overall number of confirmed cases is not high by comparison with
statistics for other infectious diseases, the distance and speed with which SARS
spread raised an alarm over the potential risks to international public health.
Containment appears to be working; however, there are fears that another SARS
outbreak could take place during the regular influenza season later in 2003.

     The United States was instrumental in the global effort to contain the spread of
SARS. Affected countries responded in different ways. Singapore and Taiwan acted
quickly and encouraged international support in curbing the spread of the virus.
China, on the other hand, has been criticized for down-playing the magnitude of the
problem, particularly in the early phase of the disease. This, some analysts contend,
ultimately enabled the virus to cross borders and in the case of Canada, hemispheres.

      This report takes a retrospective look at the global response by WHO and by
those countries most affected. It reveals some of the challenges that may lie ahead
for the global health community, such as global interdependence and transparency,
surge capacity, management of public fear and information disclosure, coordination
of different national responses, and lack of funding. Examining the impacts of SARS
and lessons learned may be useful in the response to future outbreaks or incidences
of new diseases. This report will not be updated.
Contents

Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

International Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
     Overview of the Role of the World Health Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
     WHO’s Global Health Alert Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
          The Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) . . . . . . 3
          The Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN) . . . . . . . . . . 3
     The Global Threat of SARS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     WHO’s Response to SARS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     SARS and International Health Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
          Overview of the International Health Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
          The Fifty-Sixth World Health Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

Country Responses to SARS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
    China and Hong Kong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
    Taiwan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
    Vietnam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
    Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
    Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

Congressional Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
    Infectious Disease Monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
    Capacity Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
    Improving U.S. Response Capability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

Future Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     Global Interdependence and Transparency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     Developing Surge Capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     Public Fear and Information Disclosure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     National Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     Inadequate Funding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
       Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
       (SARS): The International Response

                                Background
     Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), a new, highly infectious viral
disease, was first identified by the World Health Organization (WHO) in February
2003. It is believed to have had its beginnings in China’s Guangdong Province in
November 2002. A respiratory disease that causes flu-like symptoms which may
progress to pneumonia, SARS has an average fatality rate of 15%. Between
November 2002 and July 2003, a total of 8,437 cases and 813 deaths were reported
in 31 countries.1

     While the overall numbers are not high by comparison with other serious
infectious diseases, the speed and distance with which SARS spread raised an alarm
over the potential risks to international public health. Containment appears to be
working; however, there are fears that another SARS outbreak might take place
during the regular influenza season later in 2003. This report reviews the global
response by WHO and those countries most affected. It also examines the challenges
that may lie ahead should another outbreak of SARS (or another unknown infectious
disease) occur.2


                       International Response
     Since late February, when WHO first identified the outbreak of what later
became known as the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), it has played a
key role in the global response to the disease. SARS is a striking example of the
risks to international public health posed by such infectious diseases. It also
highlights the need for appropriate mechanisms of containment, particularly as
global travel has become the primary means of spreading the disease around the
world.

     Following its initial assessment, WHO made containment of SARS its main
goal. “Despite the lack of understanding about the disease, its cause, and future


1
 For a full discussion of the medical background to SARS and the U.S. response see CRS
Report RL31937, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS): Public Health Situation and
U.S. Response.
2
 Other sources are examining the SARS outbreak, for example, J.M. Drazen, “SARS —
Looking Back over the First 100 Days,” The New England Journal of Medicine, July 24,
2003.
                                       CRS-2

evolution, the need was great to introduce a series of emergency measures to contain
SARS outbreaks in the affected areas and prevent further international spread, thus
reducing opportunities for the new disease to establish itself.”3 Although WHO’s
representative in China, Henk Bekedam, reportedly said on June 5, 2003 that the
outbreak of SARS had reached its peak worldwide,4 WHO continues to stress the
importance of sustaining international public health measures against SARS and
working towards eliminating it as a public health threat. The SARS outbreak may
reveal valuable lessons about the effectiveness of WHO’s surveillance and response
systems, and its capacity to respond to similar outbreaks in the future. Examining the
evolution of SARS also demonstrates the chains of transmission and role of the
WHO in responding to unfolding events.

      Although WHO led an unprecedented global collaborative effort to contain
SARS, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) also played a key
role in the global partnership. For more information on the role of the CDC in
relation to SARS, see CRS Report RL31937, SARS: Public Health Situation and U.S.
Response.

Overview of the Role of the World Health Organization
     The World Health Organization (WHO), established in 1948, is the U.N.
system’s authority on international public health issues. It assists governments in
improving national health services and in establishing worldwide standards for foods,
chemicals, and biological and pharmaceutical products. WHO concentrates on
preventive rather than curative programs, including efforts to eradicate endemic and
other widespread diseases, stabilize population growth, improve nutrition, sanitation,
and maternal and child care. WHO works through contracts with other agencies and
private voluntary organizations. The United States has been a member of WHO
since 1948.

     The WHO policy making body is the World Health Assembly, composed of all
192-member states. It meets annually in May to decide the overall direction of the
Organization and the general program for a specific period, and to adopt the two-year
budget. Decisions are made by majority vote, except for decisions on the budget that
require a two-thirds vote. There is no veto provision. The Assembly elects the
Director General as well as the 32 member states who designate persons to serve on
the Executive Board. The Executive Board meets twice a year to review the work of
WHO in more detail and prepares issues for consideration by the Assembly. Ten to
twelve members of the Board are replaced every year. The United States has been
a member on the Executive Board three out of every four years.




3
  WHO, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS): Status of the Outbreak and Lessons
for the Immediate Future. WHO: Geneva, May 20, 2003.
4
  United Nations Foundation, “SARS: WHO Declares Outbreak ‘Over its Peak.’” June 5,
2003. [http://www.unwire.org/UNWire/20030605/34097_story.asp]
                                         CRS-3

WHO’s Global Health Alert Systems
     The Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN). In
April 2000, WHO formally established the Global Outbreak Alert and Response
Network (GOARN) which brought together 112 institutions and networks of people
and technical resources to respond to disease outbreaks of international concern.
This global health security network provides not only an operational framework,
drawing on data, expertise, and skill, but also aims to standardize the international
response.5 It relies on its partners and agreed standards of practice in responding to
potential threats, which may include emerging diseases and the intentional use of
biological agents. In four years, between January 1998 and March 2002, GOARN
examined 538 such cases in 132 countries.6

      The Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN). WHO also
relies on the Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN), which is a
customized search engine that tracks Internet communications. This system proved
to be very useful in picking up telecommunicated alerts in China. The system is also
useful to WHO in clarifying or refuting information that may create disruption or
panic. Other tools include geographical mapping technology and an event
management and tracking system that provides an overview of operations.

The Global Threat of SARS
     It was clear that SARS presented a serious global threat. Lack of information
about the cause and evolution of the new disease made its potential impact unknown.
WHO concluded that the virus comes from a strain likely to include frequent
mutations and links to animal species, with implications for the likelihood of
establishing endemicity and underlining the importance of finding the means to
control or contain it. Several factors were deemed critical in this analysis:

     !   The symptoms are non-specific and common;
     !   The symptoms can be severe and some patients require intensive
         care for respiratory failure;
     !   The disease spreads easily from one location to another via air travel
         as demonstrated in transmission patterns from the initial outbreak in
         Asia to other regions, such as North America and Europe;
     !   There is no vaccine or treatment yet available and diagnostics tests
         are of limited use. A number of antivirals are not effective;
     !   The causative agent is not well understood, so the potential for
         continued spread remains;
     !   Certain cases may contribute to the rapid spread of infection;
     !   Hospital staff, who are a vital link to the control of infection, are
         disproportionately affected as are other close contacts of the patients;


5
  For more information on the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network, see:
[http://www.who.int/csr/outbreaknetwork].
6
  WHO, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS): Status of the Outbreak and Lessons
for the Immediate Future. WHO: Geneva, May 20, 2003, p. 4.
                                           CRS-4

        !   The disease requires intensive treatment in isolation and is a burden
            on health care systems.7

      By comparison to SARS, except in the case of HIV/AIDS, other new diseases
that have emerged in the last few decades have not presented the same combination
of factors that pose such a heavy global risk to international health. Some of these
diseases have not sustained strong human-to-human transmission, others have relied
on food or a vector (such as mosquitos) for transmission, and still others have had an
identifiable, often containable, geographic location.

WHO’s Response to SARS
     Once the severity of the disease was recognized, in February and March 2003,
WHO took aggressive action. Examining the factors outlined above and the
chronology of events unfolding in China, Hong Kong, Vietnam, and Toronto, it
identified international travel as a primary means of spreading the virus. It also
concluded at the time that some people might be highly infectious, or “super
spreaders”. Identifying these individuals could be critical to the control of the
disease.8 On March 15, 2003, WHO issued emergency travel recommendations as
a global alert and response to international travelers, health care professionals, and
border authorities. Later in March it recommended screening passengers at airports
coming from areas with recent local transmission and gave advice to airlines on
appropriate procedures if a case was suspected during flight. In April and May, on
several occasions, the WHO issued its most stringent travel advisories recommending
the postponement of all but essential travel to areas considered high risk for SARS,.9

      WHO also quickly moved to set up systems for — and increase awareness of
the need for — immediate isolation and quarantine of those with or suspected of
having SARS. In addition, it began the detailed work of contact tracing to find the
source of the spread. These procedures along with simple diagnostics and screening
all contributed to the ongoing containment effort.

     The response to SARS placed heavy demands on WHO and its GOARN
partners. Time was very much of the essence. WHO pulled together a
comprehensive network, including mobilizing a response on the ground, providing
resources and supplies, monitoring and reporting, and establishing scientific and
medical collaboration. The WHO issued travel procedures to prevent and manage
probable cases of SARS.10 It established a collaborative multi-center research project



7
 The eight bullet points are drawn from a discussion in Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
(SARS): Status of the Outbreak and Lessons for the Immediate Future. WHO: Geneva, May
20, 2003, p. 2-3.
8
 TB and Outbreaks Weekly, “Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome; WHO points at ‘super
spreaders’ as key to stopping SARS,” April 29, 2003.
9
  WHO, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS): Status of the Outbreak and Lessons
for the Immediate Future. Geneva: WHO, May 20, 2003, p. 6.
10
     For more detail, see [www.who.int/csr/sars/travel].
                                         CRS-5

on SARS and brought together clinicians for SARS diagnosis and treatment.11 It also
developed guidelines, recommendations, and descriptions concerning case
definitions, case management, laboratories, biosafety, blood safety, epidemiology,
mass gatherings, and goods and animals from SARS-affected areas.12

     An urgent plan for the operational response to SARS was developed and
implemented. This included providing expertise and supplies in SARS-affected areas
and hospitals, and “in the air” through technology to bring the best minds to the
collaboration required. This plan resulted in:

       !   A global alert
       !   Rapid case identification
       !   Global reporting system and verification
       !   Regular updates and advice
       !   International field support and logistics coordination
       !   Epidemiological and clinical networking
       !   Laboratory network13

      Through this network, and daily conference calls, epidemiologists were able to
discuss cases, refine their definitions, examine chains of transmission, track progress,
and increase their understanding of what worked best where. Similarly, individuals
working in the clinical network were able to share experiences with different forms
of treatment, examine the possible reasons for the range of individual responses to
the disease, and develop guidelines for infection control. The network of the
laboratories enabled many scientists to work together to come up with the
identification of the SARS virus.

      Scientists have much to learn about SARS, including understanding the
evolution of the disease, designing early detection, prevention and treatment
strategies, and establishing effective surveillance systems. Until then, containment
may remain the most effective control tool. If SARS becomes endemic, the WHO
may find the application of models of response for other infectious diseases, such as
malaria, meningitis and yellow fever useful in combating the disease and developing
therapies and vaccines.14

    WHO has issued an appeal for funding to support its surveillance and
monitoring activities in Asia. It hopes to help those hardest hit by the disease
economically, to continue with their efforts to control SARS, and ultimately to




11
  For more information about the WHO collaborative network, see [http://www.who.int/
csr/sars/networkshome].
12
     Links to information under              these   headings       can   be   found   at
[http://www.who.int/csr/sars/guidelines].
13
     WHO, “The Operational Response,” April 16, 2003.
14
  WHO, “Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS): Status of the Outbreak and Lessons
for the Immediate Future,” Geneva, Switzerland, May 20, 2003, p. 7.
                                        CRS-6

eliminate the disease as a global threat.15 The WHO has an annual budget of nearly
$850 million. It relies heavily on its 192 member states for resources and teams of
experts.16

SARS and International Health Regulations
      The outbreak of SARS has raised many public health questions, including the
application of international law. According to David P. Fidler, Professor of Law at
Indiana School of Law in Bloomington, the legal implications affect three main areas
 — International Health Regulations (IHR); public health measures and civil and
political rights; and principles of state responsibility in responding to SARS.17 This
section will focus on the IHR because of its relevance to WHO.

      Overview of the International Health Regulations. In 1951, under
Article 21 of the WHO constitution, member states adopted the International Sanitary
Regulations, which in 1969 became known as the International Health Regulations
(IHR). Amendments were made in 1973 and 1981. The main purpose was to control
the spread of diseases with minimum impact on world traffic through the
development of a global surveillance system, the use of procedures at ports and
airports, and the creation of disease-specific provisions. Some argue that the
regulations have not been effective in ensuring protection against diseases in a world
of increasing trade and travel. Experts maintain that a key reason for ineffectiveness
lies in the limited number of diseases to which the IHR applies. Originally, the
regulation covered six diseases — smallpox, relapsing fever, typhus, cholera, plague,
and yellow fever.18 Today the IHR applies only to the last three diseases. Smallpox
is considered to have been eradicated some years ago. Relapsing fever and typhus had
been so successfully controlled that they were no longer considered a public health
threat. The IHR do not apply to more recent infectious diseases such as HIV/AIDS
and SARS. Member states were therefore under no obligation to report the outbreak
of a new infectious disease nor were they required to restrict trade or travel even if
it would benefit containment.19

    In the 1990s, the WHO initiated a revision of the IHR to address the limited
scope of the diseases covered, increase its relevance to the kinds of infectious disease




15
     The Australian, “WHO Seeks $306m for SARS Fight,” May 23, 2003.
16
  Washington Post, “SARS Shows WHO Disease Hunters’ Skills, and Limits,” May 31,
2003. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
17
  The American Society of International Law, SARS and International Law, April 2003, see
[http://www.asil.org/insights].
18
  WHO, “International Health Regulations.” [www.who.int/csr/ihr/en.]; The American
Society of International Law, SARS and International Law, April 2003.
19
  The American Society of International Law, SARS and International Law, April 2003,
see [http://www.asil.org/insights].
                                           CRS-7

threats most prevalent or likely today, and to manage the return of old diseases. These
revisions are scheduled to be finalized in 2005.20

     In 2001, the World Health Assembly adopted a resolution concerning member
response to international public health emergencies and global health security with
reference to epidemics. In 2002, another resolution made the response more specific,
and included health risks related not only to natural occurrence, but to accidental or
deliberate use of biological and chemical agents.21

     The SARS outbreak added momentum to discussions about revising the IHL
that were already well under way. As recently as January 2003, the 192 member
states had been discussing the details of the new framework, with a resolution for
completing the revised regulations. Although the IHR were recognized as being
outdated, the case of SARS highlighted the problems of transparency — China
denied the problem existed for months, and the information provided from Toronto
was criticized by some as incomplete and not timely enough.

     The Fifty-Sixth World Health Assembly. Fidler argues that “the SARS
epidemic may encourage WHO member states to accept a more robust international
legal framework for global infectious disease control than has existed historically.”22
At the Fifty-Sixth World Health Assembly in May 2003, the member states adopted
two resolutions relevant to the SARS outbreak, one specifically on SARS, the other
on the revision of IHL.23 The SARS resolution focuses on eleven recommendations
to WHO member states in addressing the SARS outbreak; it also requests the WHO
Director General to take specific actions. None of these are new obligations or
binding on member states as earlier press reports might have suggested. Rather, they
build on the role of the WHO and highlight the need for information sharing and
international cooperation in combating an outbreak such as SARS.24


20
  WHO Executive Board, Revision of the International Health Regulations, EB111.R13,
Agenda Item 5.12, 111th Session, January 24, 2003. Report by the Secretariat, WHO
Executive Board,”Revision of the International Health Regulations,” EB111/4, Provisional
Agenda item 5.12, 111th Session, December 15, 2002.
21
    WHO, Revision Process of the International Health Regulations (IHR).
[http://www.who.int/csr/ihr/revision/en/]. Previous resolutions include: WHA48.13 on new,
emerging, and re-emerging infectious diseases, WHA54.14 on global health security,
epidemic alert and response,EB111.R13 on revision of IHR, and EB111.R6 on the
prevention and control of influenza pandemics and annual epidemics. See Fifty-Sixth World
Health Assembly, Geneva, 19-28 May 2003, A56/48 - Revision of the International Health
Regulations.
22
     The American Society of International Law, SARS and International Law, April 2003.
23
  World Health Assembly, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), WHA56.29, May
28, 2003; and World Health Assembly, Revision of the International Health Regulations,
WHA56-28, May 28, 2003. For a discussion of these resolutions in international law, see
The American Society of International Law, Developments Involving SARS, International
Law, and Infectious Disease Control at the Fifty-Sixth Meeting of the World Health
Assembly, June 2003. See [http://www.asil.org/insights].
24
     The American Society of International Law, Developments Involving SARS, International
                                                                             (continued...)
                                        CRS-8

     The IHL Resolution takes an important political step in emphasizing the need
for member states to cooperate with other states and the WHO in monitoring and
responding to infectious diseases. Although the SARS outbreak highlighted the
strong need for revision of the IHL, then WHO Director General Gro Harlem
Brundtland also pointed out the difficult balance to be struck in revising the
regulations, such as state obligations to report sensitive health information, protection
of human rights and civil liberties in light of an international health threat, and the
impact on immigration policies and decisions.25 The IHL Resolution does not give
WHO a significant increase in authority in terms of intervention during a potential
public health threat, nor does it give WHO the power to reprimand a state that does
not comply.26 However, the IHL Resolution lays the political groundwork for states
to respond appropriately, much of the encouragement to comply will likely come
from international pressure as the SARS case demonstrated.27

      The IHL resolution was adopted as an interim measure until the IHL revisions
are finalized in 2005. The WHO opted for this two-step process rather than insisting
that members immediately approve the incorporation of the resolution into the IHL.28
Some experts suggest that this resolution will encourage WHO collaboration within
countries and also provide momentum for implementation of the measures outlined
in the resolution.29 The U.S. delegation initially asked for a postponement of action
on the proposed resolution, hoping to include it in a broader discussion, but later
conceded when it did not enlist member support.30 Others suggested that this was a
“negotiating tactic” used to avoid too early a commitment by the United States.31




24
  (...continued)
Law, and Infectious Disease Control at the Fifty-Sixth Meeting of the World Health
Assembly, June 2003. See [http://www.asil.org/insights].
25
 Washington Fax, Brundtland Urges Health Security Measures for WHO Member States,
May 21, 2003.
26
 The American Society of International Law, Developments Involving SARS, International
Law, and Infectious Disease Control at the Fifty-Sixth Meeting of the World Health
Assembly, June 2003. See [http://www.asil.org/insights].
27
  Washington Post, “WHO Gets Wider Power to Fight Global Health Threats,” May 28,
2003. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
28
  Washington Post, “WHO Gets Wider Power to Fight Global Health Threats,” May 28,
2003. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
29
     ProMed,”Comment on WHA Resolution,” May 28, 2003.
30
  Washington Post, “WHO Gets Wider Power to Fight Global Health Threats,” May 28,
2003. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
31
  United Nations Foundation, “WHO: Members Vote to Give Agency New Powers in
Outbreaks, More”UN Wire, May 28, 2003. See
[http://www.unwire.org/UNWire/20030528/33949_story.asp]
                                      CRS-9

                   Country Responses to SARS
     The SARS virus rapidly spread to 30 countries, ultimately infecting 8,437
people, of whom 813 died.32 Each country handled the virus differently. Some
countries, like Vietnam, immediately called for international support. Others, like
China, initially downplayed the severity of the virus within their borders. Although
the United States reported 75 SARS cases it had no SARS-related deaths.33
Countries experiencing five or more SARS deaths are discussed in this section.
Other countries that reported SARS deaths include: France (1), Malaysia (2),
Philippines (2), South Africa (1), and Thailand (2).

China and Hong Kong
     Reports of SARS outbreak coverups surfaced in mainland China in April 2003.
Many blamed China for the global SARS crisis, which seems to have started in
southern China. Critics argued that had China been forthright in proclaiming the
extent of the SARS problem, the disease would not have spread throughout the
country, and eventually to other countries.34

     In response to international criticism about its complacency and cover-up in
preventing the spread of the virus, the Chinese government took a number of steps
to demonstrate transparency and vigilance in combating the spread of SARS. The
Mayor of Beijing and the Minister of Health were fired.35 Chinese authorities also
quarantined those with symptoms of the disease and those with whom they had
contact, often thousands at a time.36 Entire apartment buildings, markets, hospitals,
universities, and schools were shut down. All schools in Beijing were closed for
nearly three months.37 Chinese authorities banned all tourist visits from the central
part of the country and Tibet.38 China also closed some border crossings, including




32
  WHO, Cumulative Number of Reported Probable Cases of SARS. July 10, 2003.
[http://www.who.int/csr/sars/country/2003_07_11/en/]
33
  For more information on how the United States combated the spread of SARS see CRS
Report RL31937, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS): Public Health Situation and
U.S. Response.
34
 Pomfret, John, “Beijing Told Doctors to Hide SARS Victims.” April 20, 2003. The
Washington Post. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
35
  Pomfret, John, “Thousands Flee Beijing, Fearing SARS.”       April 24, 2003. The
Washington Post. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
36
  Eckholm, Erik, “4,000 Quarantined in Beijing as Suspected SARS Cases Climb.” April
25, 2003. The New York Times. [http://www.nytimes.com]
37
   The New York Times, “As SARS Eases, Beijing Classes Resume.” May 19, 2003.
[http://www.nytimes.com]
38
    Maynard, Micheline, “Passport, Mask, Thermometer.”             May 11, 2003.
[http://www.nytimes.com]
                                         CRS-10

some between China and Mongolia and postponed reopening the Khunjirap crossing
between China and Pakistan.39

     Chinese officials enacted new laws to fight SARS. One of China’s most
controversial laws, calls for the imprisonment or execution of anyone found
intentionally spreading the virus. The first person facing punishment under this law
is Dr. Li Song. Authorities charge Dr. Li with vandalism and violating an infectious
disease law.40 Hospital officials argue that he left a hospital knowing he had SARS,
and ultimately spread the virus to his family and more than 100 others in the small
town of Linhe. Dr. Li’s mother, father and wife have died of SARS, while Dr. Li
remains in jail.41

      Other laws sought to halt the spread of the virus through fines. Authorities in
the southern town of Guangzhou began fining individuals who spit in public 50 yuan
(about $6 US), a fine that many will find difficult to pay.42 In Shanghai, those found
spitting, as well as throwing away cigarette stubs or fruit peels in public areas, and
dumping garbage and sewage in the wrong places are subject to a fine of 200 yuan
(about $24 US), compared to 50 yuan prior to the SARS outbreak.43

      China’s moves to address the spread of SARS have also included financial
assistance. The Chinese Ministry of Finance allocated a total of 440 million yuan
(about $53 million) to reinforce the fight against SARS.44 Provincial and local
governments also offered assistance to those affected by SARS. Assistance included
the distribution of temporary subsidies, disinfectants, protective surgical masks and
soap. One Beijing district, the Dongcheng District, reported that it decided to
provide 420 thousand yuan (about $51 thousand) to its low income residents, and
Chaoyang District allocated 350 thousand yuan (about $42 thousand) towards the
purchase of preventive aids.45 Meanwhile officials in Hong Kong announced a $1.5
billion aid package, which included waiving water and sewage charges for the

39
  China Internet Information Center, “China Temporarily Closes Some Border Ports.” May
12, 2003. [http://www.china.org.cn/english/index.htm]
40
 Kahn, Joseph, “Man’s Virus Infects Town, Killing His Family.” May 15, 2003. The New
York Times. [http://www.nytimes.com]
41
  Supporters of Dr. Li point out a number of inconsistencies in the charges. Although
Chinese officials claim Dr. Li spread the virus throughout Linhe when he walked out of Ba
Meng Hospital on April 8, 2003, SARS was not placed on the mandatory quarantine list
until April 14, six days later. Furthermore, members of Dr. Li’s family contend that he did
not know that he was infected with SARS, and he only left the hospital after complaining
of poor treatment. Dr. Li also reportedly walked out of the facility to care for his parents
who suddenly became ill. The Li family are currently searching for a lawyer.
42
     BBC News, “Spitting ban to combat SARS.” May 14, 2003. [www.bbc.co.uk]
43
  People’s Daily, “SARS Epidemic Increases Personal Hygiene Awareness.” April 28,
2003. [http://english.peopledaily.com.cn/]
44
  People’s Daily, “China Allocates US $6.25 mln on Anti-SARS Measures.” May 23, 2003.
[http://english.peopledaily.com.com.cn/]
45
  People’s Daily, “Beijing Moves to Aid Economically disadvantaged residents in SARS
fight.” April 24, 2003. [http://english.peopledaily.com.cn/]
                                       CRS-11

general public for up to four months, increasing income tax rebates, waiving license
fees for heavily affected industries, guaranteeing $450 million in loans to affected
businesses, increasing medical research spending, and reducing commercial rents for
stores at public housing sites and other government controlled properties.46 The
Chinese Government also reserved $128 million for a Hong Kong marketing
campaign now that the city has been removed from the WHO list of infected areas.47
According to the Chinese Government, the international community donated about
$76.6 million to aid its fight against SARS.48

     On June 10, the WHO sent a high-level team, including Dr. David Heymann,
Executive Director for Communicable Diseases at WHO, to China to assess the
current situation and plan a strategy for the future. They proposed steps for
examining and detecting cases, defining procedures for contact tracing, and
responding to local transmissions. WHO was particularly concerned about the
capacity of the Chinese rural health systems to deal with emerging infectious
diseases, from effective monitoring and reporting to adequate hospital care.49
However, it found that surveillance systems in two key rural provinces were
effective.50 China has also surprised many with the speed with which it brought its
outbreak under control. Some studies suggest that the mortality rate may have been
lower, and the cure rate higher, than in other parts of the world. Differences in
incubation period and groups at highest risk may provide clues for fighting the
disease. According to Dr. Heymann, “Long-term containment depends on finding
answers to a long list of scientific questions. China has much to offer the rest of the
world.”51

     On June 24, 2003, WHO removed its recommendation that people should
postpone all but essential travel to Beijing, China. Beijing was the last area in the
world to have the travel warning lifted. Beijing, with a cumulative total of 2,521
probable cases and 191 deaths, has had the largest outbreak of SARS anywhere in the
world, followed by Hong Kong with 1,755 cases and 296 deaths, and Guangdong
Province with 1,511 cases and 57 deaths.52




46
 Bradsher, Keith, “Epidemic Spurs Plan to Revive Hong Kong.” April 24, 2003. The New
York Times. [http://www.nytimes.com]
47
  Bradsher, Keith, “Relieved Hong Kong Starts to Shed Masks.” May 25, 2003. The New
York Times. [http://www.nytimes.com]
48
 People’s Daily, “FM Spokeswoman Briefs on Assistance to China for SARS Battle.”
May 9, 2003. [http://english.peopledaily.com.cn/]
49
     WHO, “Update 77 — WHO Officials to Visit China,” June 10, 2003.
50
   WHO, “Update 59 - Report on Guangxi (China) visit, situation in Taiwan, risk of SARS
transmission during air travel.” May 19, 2003. [httpwww.who.int/csr/sars]
51
     WHO, “Update 77 — WHO Officials to Visit China,” June 10, 2003.
52
   WHO, “Update 87 - World Health Organization changes last remaining travel
recommendation — for Beijing, China.” June 24, 2003. [http://www.who.int]
                                         CRS-12

Taiwan
     The doubling of SARS deaths53 in Taiwan prompted WHO to send a team to
investigate the island’s SARS situation. The sharp increase in new cases and deaths
surprised some as Taiwan initially appeared successful in curtailing mortality,
avoiding international community transmission, as well as maintaining a relatively
low number of new cases compared to mainland China. The government of Taiwan
took early steps to avoid a massive SARS outbreak, including imposing mandatory
10-day quarantines on all visitors arriving from China, Hong Kong, Singapore or
Toronto; cancelling more than 100 commercial flights; cancelling high school exams
scheduled for the end of May; and monitoring the temperature of visitors to many
public buildings and hotels.54

     In May 2003, the President of Taiwan, who has been vocal in his desire to gain
Taiwanese observer status to the WHO55, stated that Taiwanese hospital officials
from Taipei Municipal Hoping Hospital may have tried to cover up a SARS
outbreak.56 In response, Taiwanese authorities fired the superintendent of the
hospital and relocated all 200 patients and 900 employees from Hoping Hospital to
a designated SARS facility while the hospital was being disinfected.57 Shortly after,
the Taipei City Government fined the Hoping Hospital 1.1 million Taiwan dollars
($31,682 US) and four other hospitals 1.5 million Taiwan dollars ($43,202 US) each
for delaying reporting SARS cases to health authorities, and revoked the licence of
the former Jen Chi Hospital superintendent, Liao Cheng-hsiung, accusing him of
covering up a SARS outbreak while serving.58 The Taiwan Minister of Health, Dr.
Twu Shiing-jer, voluntarily resigned on May 16, 2003, taking full responsibility for
the SARS spread.59 Two days later, more than 140 medical employees across the
island reportedly resigned to avoid dealing with SARS patients.60 The medical
workers charged that the government had failed to provide sufficient protective
gear.61



53
  WHO reported 10 SARS deaths in Taiwan on May 6, 2003, and 24 SARS deaths on May
13, 2003.
54
 Luh, Shu Shin and John Pomfret, “Taiwan Bidding to Join WHO.” May 10, 2003. The
Washington Post. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
55
     Taiwan is not a WHO member, thus it sought China’s consent before sending a team.
56
  Luh, Shu Shin and John Pomfret, “Taiwanese President Suggests Hospital Covered Up
Disease.” May 13, 2003. The Washington Post. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
57
     Ibid.
58
  Channel News Asia, “Taiwan officials confident of bringing SARS under control despite
55 new cases Friday.” May 23, 2003. [http://www.channelnewsasia.com]
59
 McNeil Jr., Donald G., “Taiwan Health Minister Quits Over His Handling of SARS.”
May 16, 2003. The New York Times. [http://www.nytimes.com]
60
 Culpan, Tim, “Taiwan Posts Daily Record for SARS Cases.” May 21, 2003. The
Washington Post. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
61
  Connolly, Ceci and Tim Culpan, “U.S. Doctor with SARS Symptoms to Return
Home.” May 23, 2003. The Washington Post. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
                                        CRS-13

      WHO officials believe that lapses in infection control, particularly in emergency
rooms, may have been one of the reasons for the rapid increase in cases.62 Reports
seem to support the assertion that Taiwanese health officials may not have taken
enough measures to limit the spread of the virus both within and among the hospitals.
The Dean of Hoping Municipal Hospital’s Radiology Department reported that,
“Everything went wrong. There is no proper quarantine facility.” It was reported
that hospital staff did not separate SARS patients from non-SARS patients, and did
not ask patients about their medical history. Concern about Taiwan’s ability to
contain the virus was heightened when CDC officials announced on May 23, 2003
that an American doctor sent with the WHO/CDC team to investigate Taiwan’s
recent upsurge in SARS cases was suspected to have become infected with SARS
and was returned to the U.S. to undergo treatment.63 CDC officials added that
Hoping Hospital made the critical mistake of sending SARS patients to other
hospitals for treatment, unwittingly spreading the disease.64

      In addition to its collaborative efforts with CDC and WHO, Taiwan bolstered
its quarantine efforts, strengthened its contact tracing capabilities, and improved its
infection control practices. The Government of Taiwan also released a $1.44 billion
U.S. aid package, which sought to assist ailing businesses and families of SARS
victims, establish SARS prevention mechanisms, and create effective SARS contact
tracing mechanisms.65 Taiwan was removed from the WHO list of areas with recent
local transmission on July 5, 2003. Its last probable case was reported on June 19,
2003. To date, 671 people have contracted the virus, of whom 84 have died.

Vietnam
     Vietnam, the poorest of the SARS-affected countries, was the first country to
contain the SARS virus. The WHO removed Vietnam from its list of affected
countries less than five weeks after it recorded its first SARS death.66 Vietnam was
hailed as a success story largely because of its rapid response to the health crisis, and
its cooperation with WHO and CDC officials who offered critical technical
assistance.67 According to the WHO, Vietnam was fortunate to have had only one
carrier, who spent less than three days among the general public prior to
hospitalization. This limited the number of contacts that the man made.


62
  WHO, “Update 59 - Report on Guangxi (China) visit, situation in Taiwan, risk of SARS
transmission during air travel.” May 19, 2003. [http://www.who.int]
63
 Altman, Lawrence and Donald G. McNeil, “U.S. Doctor with Symptoms to Fly Home from
Taiwan.” May 23, 2003. The Washington Post. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
64
  Chung, Lawrence, “Complacency and infighting led to worsening outbreak.” May 23,
2003. The Straits Times website. [http://www.straitstimes.com]
65
  Channel News Asia, “Taiwan’s parliament approves special budget of US $1.44 billion
to combat SARS.” May 23, 2003. [http://www.channelnewsasia.com]
66
 Nakashima, Ellen, “Vietnam Took Lead in Containing SARS.” May 5, 2003. The
Washington Post. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
67
 WHO, “Update 39 - Optimism in Viet Nam, caution urged when using diagnostic tests.”
April 25, 2003. [http://www.who.int/csr/sars]
                                        CRS-14

      Some observers praised the success of the country with less resources than its
SARS-affected neighbors to rapidly contain the virus. One Vietnamese health
official explained that Vietnam’s response contrasted with China’s initial response
in that Vietnam did not seek to downplay the potential impact of the disease and it
welcomed international assistance. France quickly announced that it would offer
more than $100,000 to help sterilize Hanoi French Hospital, where the first SARS
case was detected.68 The WHO and CDC donated masks, gowns and other
equipment; Japan contributed two ventilators and other medical supplies; Doctors
Without Borders sent a medical team; and Vietnamese medical workers were trained
in infection control techniques.69 Vietnamese doctors also voluntarily quarantined
themselves in Bach Mai hospital, the designated SARS hospital, to avoid spreading
the virus to their families and the general community.

      The government of Vietnam ordered the establishment of provincial and
municipal steering committees responsible for closing down any entity and isolating
any individual who contracted SARS or was suspected to be infected with the virus.70
It also trained medical workers, customs officers, airline staff and those working in
the tourism sectors.71 The Finance Ministry spent about $2 million on medical
equipment and activities related to SARS prevention72 and targeted a little more than
$1 million for Vietnam’s border provinces tasked with preventing SARS from
leaving or entering Vietnam.73 The Government of Vietnam recently announced that
it intended to spend an additional $3.3 million to prevent SARS from returning.74
Johnny Chen, believed to have carried SARS to Vietnam from China, died of SARS
on March 13, 2003. A little more than a month later on April 28, 2003, the WHO
announced that Vietnam was the first country to have contained the deadly virus. A
total of 63 people contracted SARS in Vietnam, 5 of whom died.75




68
    Asia Times, “Vietnam shows how to beat SARS.”                    April 30, 2003.
[http://www.atimes.com]
69
 Nakashima, Ellen, “Vietnam Took Lead in Containing SARS.” May 5, 2003. The
Washington Post. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
70
  Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “Further precautions taken to ward off SARS.” March 31,
2003. [http://www.mofa.gov.vn]
71
  Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “Deputy Prime Minister asks all provinces to establish SARS
control committees.” April 16, 2003. [http://www.mofa.gov.vn]
72
  Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “30 billion VND for SARS prevention work.” April 8, 2003.
[http://www.mofa.gov.vn]
73
  Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “Further precautions taken to ward off SARS.” March 31,
2003. [http://www.mofa.gov.vn]
74
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “Ninety returnees from Beijing to leave isolated centre.”
May 12, 2003. [http://www.mofa.gov.vn]
                                       CRS-15

Singapore
     Some civil libertarians criticized the Government of Singapore in its response
to the SARS virus as being too harsh. However, the World Health Organization
commended Singapore on its response to the virus. Dr. David Heymann, Executive
Director of communicable disease programs at the WHO described Singapore’s
actions as “exemplary”, and stated that “Singapore has been one of the most
successful countries in its response to SARS.”76 The World Health Organization
removed Singapore from the list of areas with local SARS transmission on May 30,
2003.77

     Singapore’s actions against SARS were viewed as swift and widespread. For
example, the Ministry of Education required all schools to provide students with a
personal thermometer, and to teach them to check their own temperatures daily. All
students taking the national language exams in June 2003, underwent temperature
checks before entering testing sites. The Ministry also required the Institutes of
Higher Learning to segment their large campuses into smaller sections to reduce
movement across the campus and to facilitate contact tracing. Singapore required all
students and households to have thermometers by June 2003. Other steps taken to
prevent the spread of SARS included: directing all SARS cases to one hospital,
installing video cameras in the homes of all quarantined individuals, electronically
tagging violators of quarantine orders, using body thermal scanners at airports,
enforcing mandatory temperature checks for all individuals departing Singapore and
those arriving from SARS affected areas, requiring all food handlers to take their
temperatures twice a day, and applying mandatory temperature checks for entry to
many public events. On March 24, 2003, the Singapore Ministry of Health invoked
the Infectious Disease Act to isolate those infected with SARS, and prevent the
further spread of the virus. The act was amended on May 23, 2003, by requiring all
those who broke the home quarantine to be tagged, arrested, detained, and/or fined.
The first offense is punishable by up to $10,000 or 6 months imprisonment and
repeat offenders can be fined up to $20,000 or 12 months.78




76
  WHO, “Update 53 - Situation in Singapore and Hong Kong, interpretation of areas with
recent local transmission.” May 12, 2003. [http://www.who.int]
77
 WHO, “Update 70 - Singapore removed from list of areas with local SARS transmission.”
May 30, 2003. [http://www.who.int]
78
   Singapore Ministry of Information ,”Ministerial Statement in Parliament, SARS - A
National Response.” April 24, 2003. [http://app.sprinter.gov.sg/data/pr/2003042408.htm];
Ramesh, S, “Singapore toughens Infectious Disease Act to deal with SARS outbreak.” April
25, 2003. Channel News Asia. [http://www.channelnewsasia.com]; Government of
S i n g a p o r e , “ H o m e Q u a r a n t i n e In f o r m a t i o n . ” May 27, 2003.
[http://www.sars.gov.sg/family.html]; and Singapore Ministry of Education, “Arrangements
for the 2003 GCE ‘O’ & ‘A’ Level Mother Tongue Language Mid-Year Examinations.”
May 27, 2003. Government of Singapore. [www.sars.gov.sg]
                                       CRS-16

    The Government of Singapore also unveiled a $230 million SARS relief
package on April 17, 2003. Key elements include:

     !   a Home Quarantine Allowance Scheme, which pays an allowance
         to the self-employed and to small business owners who have
         employees affected by home quarantine orders;79
     !   property tax rebates for commercial properties and tourist hotels;
     !   50% reduction in foreign worker levy for unskilled workers
         employed by tourist hotels;
     !   a Bridging Loan Program, which offers working capital loans to
         tourism-related small- and medium-sized enterprises;
     !   a Skills Redevelopment Program and SARS Relief Tourism
         Training Assistance Program, which offers funds to employers who
         send their employees to certified training courses in the tourism
         sector;
     !   diesel and road tax rebates for taxis, and operator licence fee
         waivers;
     !   rebates on aircraft landing fees and rental spaces at airports;
     !   50% reduction in port dues for cruise ships; and
     !   dollar-for-dollar matching of funds for the Courage Fund, a tripartite
         fund established to help the victims of SARS and affected health
         care workers. The fund received nearly $10 million in just 7 weeks.80

     Singapore was removed from the list of areas with recent local transmission on
May 31, 2003. To date, 206 people have contracted SARS in Singapore, and 32 have
died of the virus. The last probable case was reported on May 18, 2003.

Canada
     When SARS first emerged in the country some criticized Canadian officials for
waiting too long to quarantine 500 members of a prayer group widely believed to
have been the source of the virus in Canada.81 WHO officials also complained that
the Canadian government had been slow to relay current information. Relations
between the U.N. agency and Canadian authorities were strained when the WHO
decided to place a SARS travel advisory on Toronto. Canada appealed to the WHO
to remove the travel advisory, because officials claimed they could trace all
occurrences of the virus.82 On May 14, 2003, two days after the 24th SARS victim
died, the WHO removed the travel advisory, citing 20 days had passed without new


79
  Singapore Ministry of Information ,”Ministerial Statement in Parliament, SARS - A
National Response.” April 24, 2003. [http://app.sprinter.gov.sg/data/pr/2003042408.htm]
80
  Ministry of Manpower, “Joint Media Release from the Ministry of Finance and Ministry
of Trade & Industry: Government Unveils $230 million SARS Relief Package.” April 24,
2003. [http://www.mom.gov.sg]
81
  Krauss, Clifford, “Disease Has Canada Doubting Its Leaders,” New York Times, April 19,
2003.
82
  Brown, DeNeen L., “Virus Worry Fades in Toronto, but Concerns Lingers.” April 24,
2003. The Washington Post. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
                                        CRS-17

cases. However, on May 23, 2003 Toronto health officials reported that four new
suspected SARS cases were under close surveillance.83 On May 26, 2003, the WHO
placed Toronto back on its list of countries with recent local transmission, but it did
not place a travel advisory on the city.

      Following criticism of bureaucratic delay, Canadian officials took a number of
steps to contain the virus, including inviting the U.S. Centers for Disease Control
(CDC) to monitor its hospitals, closing a number of hospitals and clinics, and
quarantining those individuals suspected to have SARS. Canada also undertook a
number of initiatives to aid businesses and individuals adversely affected by SARS.
 On April 30, 2003, the Government of Canada passed the SARS Assistance and
Recovery Strategy Act, which protects the jobs of people affected by SARS, and
enables employees to take unpaid leave of absence for SARS-related reasons. It also
included $1.7 million in new funding to help scientists develop a new test and
possible vaccine for SARS. All tourist facilities in Toronto were also exempt from
retail tax from May 1, 2003 to September 30, 2003, under the act.84

     Another government initiative implemented to assist Canadians affected by
SARS is the SARS Grant Initiative. Eligible full-time and part-time health care
workers affected by SARS can receive $400 per week and $200 per week,
respectively. This initiative complements adjustments made to the Employment
Insurance (EI) Act, which allows up to 15 weeks of special benefits when an eligible
claimant is unable to work because of illness, injury or quarantine. The Government
of Canada has adjusted the EI program so that those who become ill due to SARS are
not immediately required to provide a medical certificate, and no longer have to wait
two weeks to receive benefits.85 Other SARS-related actions include:

     !   committing $10 million toward a marketing campaign;
     !   arranging special payment schedules or temporary deferral of
         mortgage payment for those who find it difficult to pay mortgages
         due to SARS;
     !   extending tax due dates, establishing flexible payment schedules and
         waiving tax penalties or interest for those affected by SARS; and
     !   offering a four-month postponement of capital payments without
         penalty and small capital loans to small businesses affected by
         SARS.86



83
  The Straits Times, “Officials fear four in Toronto hospital may have SARS.” May 23,
2003. [http://straitstimes.com]
84
  Premier Erne Eves Media Office, “Premier Ernie Eves’ SARS strategy bill passes on first
day of legislature.” May 13, 2003, Canada NewsWire.
[http://www.newswire.ca/releases/April2003/30/c6392.html] and Brown, DeNeen L.,
“Canada Seeks Help From CDC in Fighting Virus.” April 23, 2003. The Washington Post.
85
  Human Resources Development Canada, “Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome News
Release.” March 28, 2003. Human Resources Development Canada.
[http://www.hrdc-drhc.gc.ca/common/news/insur/030328.shtml]
86
  Government of Canada, “Government of Canada Action to Contain the Effects of Severe
Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS).” May 2, 2003. Prime Minister of Canada website.
[http://www.pm.gc.ca/]
                                       CRS-18

      In June 2003, health workers concerned about their safety, including hundreds
of nurses, demonstrated in Canada to demand danger pay, protective suits, and a
public investigation into the cause of the SARS resurgence. Some nurses claimed
that hospital officials were slow to respond to their warnings that patients in other
wards showed SARS-like symptoms. Still, some family practitioners expressed
concern that health officials failed to notify them when the virus first resurfaced. As
a result, some family practitioners fell ill with the virus.87 When the virus resurfaced
thirteen people died of SARS and thousands were quarantined.88

     Toronto was removed from the list of areas with recent local transmission on
July 2, 2003. The last probable case was reported on June 12, 2003. To date, 250
people have contracted the virus and 38 have died of SARS.


                      Congressional Response
Infectious Disease Monitoring
      The rapid spread of the SARS virus underscored the importance of establishing
a database system that would allow rapid and accurate information sharing on
emergent infectious diseases. The Senate FY2004 Labor, Health and Human
Services (HHS) and Education appropriations bill provides over $370 billion for
infectious disease control at CDC, including $25 million for SARS research,
prevention and control. It also includes $50 million to develop a Global Disease
Detection System at the CDC that would enable the United States to effectively
respond to a global infectious disease threat. The Senate bill also increases NIH
funding for emerging infectious disease from nearly $600 million in FY2003 to $1.7
billion.

Capacity Building
     Congress has also recognized the need to strengthen state and local capacity to
respond to a bioterrorist attack or infectious disease outbreak. The Senate bill
proposes that CDC funds for that purpose be maintained at FY2003 levels, $940
million. Part of strengthening state and local capacity includes the support of the
Health Alert Network (HAN). Prior to HAN, one-half of local public health
departments did not have e-mail. The HAN system has been used to share
information about SARS. Forty million U.S. dollars have been reserved for this
purpose in the Senate version of the FY2004 Labor, HHS, and Education
appropriations bill.




87
    The Washington Post, “SARS Takes Toll on Nurses.”                 June 12, 2003.
[http://www.washingtonpost.com]
88
   WHO, “Cumulative # of Reported Probable Cases of SARS.”               June 2, 2003.
[http://www.who.int]
                                       CRS-19

Improving U.S. Response Capability
     The rapid spread of the SARS virus has demonstrated the need to quickly and
effectively respond to an intentional or natural infectious disease outbreak. Congress
appropriated $77.5 million to the CDC Epidemic Services and Response program in
FY2003. The Senate version of the FY2004 Labor, HHS and Education
appropriations bill increases funding for those efforts to $127.5 million in FY2004.
The CDC Epidemic and Response program provides resources and scientific
expertise for operating and evaluating surveillance systems; develops and refines
research methods and strategies for public health practitioners; and trains public
health professionals who respond to public health emergencies and outbreaks. The
Senate version also directs over $578 million to the Health Resources and Services
Administration (HRSA) to combat bioterrorism.89


                            Future Challenges
     The SARS outbreak has provided lessons that may have future application. The
WHO/CDC intervention greatly increased the effectiveness of the global response.
A number of factors influenced the outcome, such as the system of global alerts and
awareness, and access to immediate, high-level research and scientific collaboration.
Coordinated efforts through the WHO/CDC, national governments, and the public
health professionals also led to positive results, as in the case of Vietnam. Dr. Julie
Gerberding, Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, had high
praise for WHO’s leadership during the crisis and emphasized communication and
transparency as key to responding to international health crises. Areas in which
improvements have been called for in the global response to infectious disease threats
include:

Global Interdependence and Transparency
      Lack of transparency in promptly reporting and monitoring SARS outbreaks
directly contributed to the spread of the disease worldwide and had wide-ranging
impacts beyond the obvious health factors. The case of SARS demonstrated that
state responsibility within a globalized world does not end at its borders and that
future containment relies on openness and cooperation in the interests of all
populations.




89
  For more information on Congressional efforts to combat SARS, see CRS Report
RL31937, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS): Public Health Situation and U.S.
Response.
                                        CRS-20

Developing Surge Capacity
     The ability of public health systems and the availability of resources to deal with
a threat like SARS were clearly inadequate. Addressing the need and ability to
mobilize additional resources, both within the country itself, and through the WHO
network during an emergency, would improve the response to similar challenges in
the future. Some have expressed concern about the impact SARS could have had if
the outbreak had reached developing countries with minimal health care
infrastructures, particularly those already weakened by HIV/AIDS. Others have
argued that SARS has underscored the importance of boosting aid efforts that offer
structural support, such as aiding in the training of health care professionals, donating
medical supplies and equipment, upgrading health technologies, and ensuring
universal inoculation against resurgent diseases such as tuberculosis.

Public Fear and Information Disclosure
      The WHO had to strike a balance. On the one hand it was pressed to give
information, and use aggressive tactics of containment. On the other hand, the
information about SARS may have contributed to public panic and anxiety,
discrimination in some cases, and other impacts, such as economic losses. Some
argue that the WHO did not take into account the impact of its decision-making
concerning travel advisories and global alert warnings and that the SARS risk
sometimes did not demonstrate the need for such a response.90 Some governments
in the future may be hesitant rapidly and openly to share outbreak information,
because they may want to avoid potential negative economic impacts, such as job
losses, hotel closures and flight cancellations as occurred at the height of the SARS
crisis. For example, 60,000 restaurant and hotel workers in Hong Kong lost their jobs
or were placed on unpaid leave during the SARS outbreak.91 In Singapore, year-by-
year comparisons showed that tourist arrivals fell 15% in March 2003 and 67% in
April 2003, and hotels reported occupancy rates of only 10 to 30%, compared to
usual occupancy rates of 70% or more during the first quarter of the year. 92

National Response
     The weakness of national surveillance systems and health networks within any
one country can dramatically affect the area and rate at which a disease spreads. If
the SARS virus had spread more rapidly and extensively throughout the affected
countries and for a sustained period, it could have had a significant impact on the
health care systems, and other systems. Those in need of health care, such as those
with cancer, requiring surgery, or those requiring immediate medical attention may
not have been able to receive care. In order to contain the SARS virus, hospital
wards and, at times, entire hospitals were shut down for weeks at a time to


90
     Far Eastern Economic Review, “SARS: A WHO-Induced Panic?” May 22, 2003.
91
    MSNBC, “Record SARS            deaths   in   Hong    Kong.”      April   15,   2003.
[http://www.msnbc.com]
92
  Channel News Asia, “National Wages Council (NWC) wage guidelines for July 2003 to
June 2004.” May 27, 2003. [http://www.channelnewsasia.com]
                                       CRS-21

decontaminate them. Significant resources were used to quarantine SARS-infected
individuals, schools were closed, and other private facilities were adversely impacted.
Such problems caused by SARS illustrate the need to develop effective national
response systems.

Inadequate Funding
      WHO officials and others have argued that there is a need for increased funding
for laboratories and epidemiological research in the fight to contain diseases like
SARS. Improvements to the existing surveillance network and national capacity to
address emergency health issues are also badly needed. For example, GOARN
reportedly needs $200 million to reinforce its network.93




93
     Associated Press,”New WHO Chief Plans More Action on SARS,” May 21, 2003.
EveryCRSReport.com

The Congressional Research Service (CRS) is a federal legislative branch agency, housed inside the
Library of Congress, charged with providing the United States Congress non-partisan advice on
issues that may come before Congress.

EveryCRSReport.com republishes CRS reports that are available to all Congressional staff. The
reports are not classified, and Members of Congress routinely make individual reports available to
the public.

Prior to our republication, we redacted names, phone numbers and email addresses of analysts
who produced the reports. We also added this page to the report. We have not intentionally made
any other changes to any report published on EveryCRSReport.com.

CRS reports, as a work of the United States government, are not subject to copyright protection in
the United States. Any CRS report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without
permission from CRS. However, as a CRS report may include copyrighted images or material from a
third party, you may need to obtain permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or
otherwise use copyrighted material.

Information in a CRS report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public
understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to members of Congress in
connection with CRS' institutional role.

EveryCRSReport.com is not a government website and is not affiliated with CRS. We do not claim
copyright on any CRS report we have republished.
                                                                        The   new england journal           of   medicine



                                                                                 original article


                                                  Public Health Measures to Control the Spread
                                                    of the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
                                                         during the Outbreak in Toronto
                                                  Tomislav Svoboda, M.D., Bonnie Henry, M.D., M.P.H., Leslie Shulman, M.H.Sc.,
                                                           Erin Kennedy, M.H.Sc., Elizabeth Rea, M.D., Wil Ng, M.H.Sc.,
                                                              Tamara Wallington, M.D., Barbara Yaffe, M.D., M.H.Sc.,
                                                               Effie Gournis, M.Sc., M.P.H., Elisa Vicencio, M.H.Sc.,
                                                       Sheela Basrur, M.D., M.H.Sc., and Richard H. Glazier, M.D., M.P.H.


                                                                                          abstract

                                                  background
From Toronto Public Health (T.S., B.H.,           Toronto was the site of North America’s largest outbreak of the severe acute respiratory
L.S., E.K., E.R., W.N., T.W., B.Y., E.G., E.V.,   syndrome (SARS). An understanding of the patterns of transmission and the effects
S.B.); the Departments of Public Health
Sciences (T.S., B.H., E.R., B.Y., S.B., R.H.G.)   on public health in relation to control measures that were taken will help health offi-
and Family and Community Medicine (T.S.,          cials prepare for any future outbreaks.
R.H.G.), University of Toronto; and St. Mi-
chael’s Hospital Inner City Health Re-            methods
search Unit (T.S., R.H.G.) — all in Toronto.
Address reprint requests to Dr. Svoboda           We analyzed SARS case, quarantine, and hotline records in relation to control mea-
at the Inner City Health Research Unit,           sures. The two phases of the outbreak were compared.
University of Toronto, 70 Richmond St. E.,
4th Fl., Toronto, ON M5C 1N8, Canada, or          results
at tomislav.svoboda@utoronto.ca.
                                                  Toronto Public Health investigated 2132 potential cases of SARS, identified 23,103
N Engl J Med 2004;350:2352-61                     contacts of SARS patients as requiring quarantine, and logged 316,615 calls on its
Copyright © 2004 Massachusetts Medical Society.   SARS hotline. In Toronto, 225 residents met the case definition of SARS, and all but
                                                  3 travel-related cases were linked to the index patient, from Hong Kong. SARS spread
                                                  to 11 (58 percent) of Toronto’s acute care hospitals. Unrecognized SARS among in-
                                                  patients with underlying illness caused a resurgence, or a second phase, of the out-
                                                  break, which was finally controlled through active surveillance of hospitalized pa-
                                                  tients. In response to the control measures of Toronto Public Health, the number of
                                                  persons who were exposed to SARS in nonhospital and nonhousehold settings
                                                  dropped from 20 (13 percent) before the control measures were instituted (phase 1) to
                                                  0 afterward (phase 2). The number of patients who were exposed while in a hospital
                                                  ward rose from 25 (17 percent) in phase 1 to 68 (88 percent) in phase 2, and the num-
                                                  ber exposed while in the intensive care unit dropped from 13 (9 percent) in phase 1 to
                                                  0 in phase 2. Community spread (the length of the chains of transmission outside of
                                                  hospital settings) was significantly reduced in phase 2 of the outbreak (P<0.001).

                                                  conclusions
                                                  The transmission of SARS in Toronto was limited primarily to hospitals and to house-
                                                  holds that had had contact with patients. For every case of SARS, health authorities
                                                  should expect to quarantine up to 100 contacts of the patients and to investigate 8 pos-
                                                  sible cases. During an outbreak, active in-hospital surveillance for SARS-like illnesses
                                                  and heightened infection-control measures are essential.


2352                                                                   n engl j med 350;23    www.nejm.org       june 3, 2004



                                                             The New England Journal of Medicine
                               Downloaded from nejm.org on January 13, 2021. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
                                              Copyright © 2004 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
                                      outbreak of sars in toronto


                                                           tency of data collection and interpretation, we re-

f       rom february to july 2003, toronto
        experienced the largest outbreak of the se-
        vere acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) out-
side Asia. A diagnosis of SARS was given to 225 pa-
tients according to Health Canada criteria. SARS is
                                                           stricted our analysis to data on Toronto residents.

                                                           setting
                                                           Toronto, the capital of the province of Ontario, is
a newly emerged infectious respiratory illness that        Canada’s largest city, with an ethnically diverse pop-
has been well described.1-10 The human and eco-            ulation of 2.5 million. Toronto’s international air-
nomic consequences of the SARS outbreak in To-             port handled 14.5 million international passenger
ronto have been far-reaching. On April 23, 2003,           trips in 2002.15 The city has 19 acute care hospitals
the World Health Organization (WHO) issued an              with emergency departments. Residents of Toronto
advisory against travel to Toronto.11 Although it was      are insured for all essential health services through
withdrawn six days later, the advisory had a costly        a single universal provincial insurance plan.
effect. The tourism industry lost $260 million (Ca-
nadian), and 11 percent of businesses related to           initial investigation and control
tourism reported layoffs.12,13 In Ontario, provin-         On March 13, 2003, one day after the WHO issued
cial government costs of coping with SARS have             its first global alert about “atypical pneumonia,”
been estimated at $1.13 billion (Canadian).14              Toronto Public Health reported Toronto’s first case
    The Toronto outbreak was unique in having two          of SARS. Figure 1 summarizes the progression of
distinct phases, the second occurring after the out-       important dates and interventions during the out-
break was prematurely declared over. This article          break. Community awareness was heightened by
describes the SARS outbreak in relation to the pub-        prominent daily media coverage. Toronto Public
lic health measures taken to control it. The data          Health investigated and tracked all potential cases
presented here will help health care professionals,        of SARS that were reported by clinicians, and it
hospital personnel, and public health officials un-        identified and quarantined contacts of patients. All
derstand how the disease spreads and decide where          cases of SARS were isolated and treated in a hospi-
and how to focus resources and control measures.           tal. Institutions where the transmission of SARS
                                                           occurred were evaluated, and infection-control mea-
                    methods                                sures were implemented by public health teams to-
                                                           gether with hospital staff. The provincial Ministry
study design                                               of Health required hospitals throughout the prov-
We analyzed Toronto Public Health data and com-            ince to ban all nonessential staff members and visi-
pared control measures, community spread, and              tors except on compassionate grounds (e.g., a par-
quarantine efforts in the two phases of the out-           ent visiting an ill child) and to suspend all outpatient
break. We were able to compare the risk factors in         and elective inpatient care. Hospitals were required
cases during the implementation of initial infec-          to screen all patients, staff members, and visitors
tion-control measures (phase 1) with the risk fac-         for risk factors for and symptoms of SARS, and
tors afterward (phase 2). Phase 1 (February 23 to          workers were required to use gloves, gowns, eye
April 21, 2003) is defined as the time from the on-        protection, and N95 respirators for all contact with
set of illness in the index travel-related patient until   patients. Similar measures were instituted for out-
the onset of illness in the last patient identified as     patient sites, and clinics were established for the
having SARS before the outbreak was first declared         assessment of SARS.
over. Phase 2 (April 22 to July 1, 2003) extended              Persons with potential cases of SARS were cared
from the end of phase 1 until two incubation peri-         for as if they had SARS until the illness was ruled
ods (defined as the greatest length of time between        out. All potential SARS cases were classified ac-
exposure and the onset of symptoms: 10 days) af-           cording to Health Canada case definitions as “prob-
ter the onset of the last recognized case in Toronto.      able” or “suspect” or as not meeting the case def-
We used letters of the alphabet to identify Toronto        inition.16 Patients with suspect cases had had close
hospitals according to the order of the onset of cases     contact with a patient with SARS, had a fever of
(e.g., Hospital A recorded the first case of SARS).        38°C or higher, and had new shortness of breath or
Local health units in municipalities adjacent to To-       cough. These cases were reclassified as probable if
ronto were responsible for managing cases and              radiographic or autopsy findings were consistent
contacts among their residents. To ensure consis-          with pneumonia or the respiratory distress syn-


                                n engl j med 350;23   www.nejm.org      june 3, 2004                                  2353


                                           The New England Journal of Medicine
             Downloaded from nejm.org on January 13, 2021. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
                            Copyright © 2004 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
                                          The   new england journal              of   medicine


       drome or if an assay for SARS-associated corona-                sure, provided support, and monitored the contacts
       virus (SARS-CoV) was positive. If an alternative di-            for the onset of symptoms and compliance. The in-
       agnosis could fully explain the illness, then SARS              structions for quarantine included sleeping sepa-
       was ruled out. When laboratory assays for SARS-                 rately from others, using personal items (e.g., uten-
       CoV became available in phase 2, serologic tests of             sils and towels) exclusively (i.e., not sharing them),
       multiple acute- and convalescent-phase blood sam-               and wearing a mask when near household mem-
       ples were performed, in addition to polymerase-                 bers. The 10-day quarantine was extended for any
       chain-reaction (PCR) tests, in patients with SARS               contacts who had early symptoms (e.g., headache
       and those with potential cases of SARS.                         or myalgias). If Toronto Public Health could not
          Toronto Public Health staff identified close con-            reach a close contact until more than 10 days after
       tacts of patients through interviews, reviews of pa-            his or her last exposure, then the contact was as-
       tient and visitor logs, and employee schedules in               sessed for SARS-like illness.
       institutions where the transmission of SARS oc-                     In hospitals in which SARS was transmitted to
       curred. Close contacts (henceforth referred to as               multiple staff members and patients, it was diffi-
       contacts) were people who cared for, lived with, or             cult to identify all possible exposures within the
       had face-to-face contact (within 1 m) with a person             10-day incubation period. Therefore, all persons
       with SARS or direct contact with the respiratory se-            in a hospital during a defined period were consid-
       cretions or bodily fluids of a person with SARS.16              ered contacts and were quarantined for the 10 days
       Contacts who had SARS-like symptoms were re-                    immediately after their last day in the hospital.
       ferred for medical assessment. Public health staff              “Work quarantine” was established to prevent a
       instructed asymptomatic contacts to stay at home                shortage of essential health care staff. Members of
       under quarantine for the 10 days after the last expo-           the hospital and paramedic staff under work quar-




        Figure 1. Onset of SARS in Residents of Toronto in Relation to the Implementation of Control Measures.
        The onset of the last case of SARS in Toronto that was not travel-related was on June 8, 2003. The World Health Organi-
        zation designated Toronto as a region not affected by SARS 20 days after a case with an onset on June 12, 2003, outside
        of Toronto. Community penetration quantifies the extent of transmission beyond the hospital or travel-related setting,
        and the levels are as follows: zero degree (cases that were related to travel or patients who were exposed in the hospital),
        first degree (cases among household contacts of persons with zero-degree cases; cases among contacts of persons with
        first-degree cases in the same household were also considered first-degree cases), second degree (cases among contacts
        of persons with zero-degree or first-degree cases outside households of persons with zero-degree cases [e.g., work and
        school contacts]), and third degree (cases among contacts of persons with second-degree cases). ICU denotes intensive
        care unit.




2354                                      n engl j med 350;23    www.nejm.org         june 3 , 2004



                                       The New England Journal of Medicine
         Downloaded from nejm.org on January 13, 2021. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
                        Copyright © 2004 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
                                          outbreak of sars in toronto



  Table 1. Numerical Overview of the SARS Outbreak in Toronto.

  Variable                                                                                                    No. (%)
  Cases of SARS                                                                                              358 (100.0)
     Among Toronto residents                                                                                 225 (62.8)
     Among non-Toronto residents in municipalities adjoining Toronto                                         133 (37.2)
  Potential SARS cases investigated in Toronto                                                             2,132 (100.0)
     Did not meet case definition of SARS                                                                  1,907 (89.4)
     Met the definition of probable or suspected case of SARS                                                225 (10.6)
         Classified as probable SARS                                                                         201 (89.3)
         Classified as suspect SARS                                                                           24 (10.6)
  Patients in Toronto who met the case definition of SARS                                                    225 (100.0)
     Serologic tests performed during the convalescent phase                                                 129 (57.3)
         Positive                                                                                            124 (96.1)
         Negative                                                                                              5 (3.9)
     Required care in the intensive care unit                                                                 55 (24.4)
         Required intubation                                                                                  40 (72.7)
         Did not require intubation                                                                           15 (27.3)
     Survived                                                                                                187 (83.1)
     Died*                                                                                                    38 (16.9)
  Contacts of patients in Toronto who were identified as requiring quarantine                             23,103 (100.0)
     Complied with the quarantine                                                                         13,291 (57.5)
     Reached after the required quarantine period                                                          8,058 (34.9)
     Could not be reached during the SARS outbreak                                                         1,754 (7.6)
  Site of exposure
     Hospital                                                                                             16,149 (69.9)
     Work or school                                                                                        2,148 (9.3)
     Doctor’s office                                                                                       2,150 (9.3)
     Setting involving social ties or extended family                                                        924 (4.0)
     Household of a patient                                                                                  554 (2.4)
     Other settings                                                                                        1,178 (5.1)
  Calls to the Toronto Public Health hotline†                                                            316,615 (100.0)
     Calls in which the “listen to recorded information” option was selected                             183,439 (57.9)
     Calls in which the “speak to a staff person” option was selected but that were not handled          104,852 (33.1)
             by a staff person
     Calls handled by a SARS hotline staff person                                                         28,324 (8.9)

* Thirty-six patients with SARS died within 8 weeks after the onset of the illness; one died 15 weeks and one 18 weeks after
  the onset, from complications of SARS.
† The maximal number of hotline calls to Toronto Public Health in one day was 41,789. The number of calls handled by a
  staff person ranged from 214 to 1471 in one day. The number of calls that could be handled was limited by the number
  of available staff persons and the complexity and duration of each call.



antine were permitted to go to work, where they     used to compare categorical and continuous varia-
followed the infection-control precautions required bles for demographic characteristics and risk fac-
for all health care staff members. When they were   tors. For patients with one distinct exposure, the
not at work, they were quarantined at home.         incubation period was calculated as the length of
                                                    time between exposure and the onset of symp-
statistical analysis                                toms. The incubation period could not be calculat-
Fisher’s exact test and Student’s t-test (performed ed for patients with multiple exposures. Commu-
with the use of SPSS software, version 10) were nity spread was described in terms of community


                                   n engl j med 350;23    www.nejm.org       june 3, 2004                                      2355


                                              The New England Journal of Medicine
                Downloaded from nejm.org on January 13, 2021. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
                               Copyright © 2004 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
                                                                                                          2356
                                                                                                                                                            60                                                                                                                                                                         8000
                                                                                                                                                                         Did not meet SARS case definition
                                                                                                                                                                         Met SARS case definition
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       7000
                                                                                                                                                            50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Contacts requiring
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 quarantine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6000

                                                                                                                                                            40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     The




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5000


                                                                                                                                                            30                                                                                                                                                                         4000




                                                                                                         n engl j med 350;23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3000




                                                                                                                                No. of Cases Investigated
                                                                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              No. of Contacts Requiring Quarantine




                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     new england journal




                                                                                                             www.nejm.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     of




                              The New England Journal of Medicine
                                                                                                                                                             0                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                    03                     03          03            03           03                  03              3                  03         03                   3         3
                                                                                                                                                                 5/                     5/           4/           4/           4/                  4/               /0                4/          3/                   /0        /0
                                                                                                                                                              1                        2           4/          1            2                    5/               14               2            6/                   13        23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     medicine




                                                                                                                                                            3/                    3/                         4/           4/                                    5/               5/                                6/        6/




                                                                                                         june 3 , 2004




               Copyright © 2004 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Date of Report to Toronto Public Health


                                                                                                                               Figure 2. Cases Investigated for SARS and Contacts Identified as Requiring Quarantine.
                                                                                                                               Bars represent cases investigated that met or did not meet the SARS case definition. The numbers of contacts do not include 5743 health care workers who were placed in work quaran-
                                                                                                                               tine. The maximal number of persons requiring quarantine at any one time was 6995.




Downloaded from nejm.org on January 13, 2021. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
                                           outbreak of sars in toronto



  Table 2. Proportion of SARS Cases According to Exposure.

                                                      Phase 1    Phase 2       Total                        Odds Ratio
  Risk Factor*                                       (N=148)     (N=77)      (N=225)       P Value†         (95% CI)‡
                                                            no. of patients (%)
  Setting of exposure
  Hospital
     Ward                                            25 (16.9) 68 (88.3) 93 (41.3)           <0.001      37.2 (16.4–84.2)
     Emergency room                                  22 (14.9)    0          22 (9.8)        <0.001             —
     Other                                           14 (9.5)     1 (1.3)    15 (6.7)         0.02       0.13 (0.0 –1.0)
     Intensive care unit                             13 (8.8)     0          13 (5.8)         0.005             —
     Critical care unit                               9 (6.1)     0           9 (4.0)         0.03              —
     Long-term care facility                          4 (2.7)     0           4 (1.8)         0.30        0.0 (0.0–2.9)
     Ambulance                                        1 (<1.0)    1 (1.3)     2 (<1.0)        1.0         1.9 (0.1–31.4)
  Nonhospital
     Household                                       40 (27.0)    7 (9.1)    47 (20.9)        0.002       0.3 (0.1–0.6)
     Private gathering                               10 (6.8)     0          10 (4.4)         0.02              —
     Clinic                                           5 (3.4)     0           5 (2.2)         0.17              —
     Travel§                                          4 (2.7)     0           4 (1.8)         0.30              —
     Workplace                                        1 (<1.0)    0           1 (<1.0)        1.0               —
  Role during exposure¶
  Hospital
     Nurse                                           27 (18.2) 17 (22.1) 44 (19.6)            0.49        1.3 (0.6–2.5)
     Patient                                         24 (16.2) 25 (32.5) 49 (21.8)            0.007       2.5 (1.3–4.4)
     Visitor of a patient                            13 (8.8)    12 (15.6) 25 (11.1)          0.18        1.9 (0.8–4.4)
     Physician                                       11 (7.4)     4 (5.2)    15 (6.7)         0.59        0.7 (0.2– 2.2)
     Other member of hospital staff                  10 (6.8)     8 (10.4) 18 (8.0)           0.44        1.6 (0.6–4.2)
     Emergency medical service staff member           1 (<1.0)    1 (1.3)     2 (<1.0)        1.0         1.9 (0.1–31.4)
     Ancillary patient care staff member              6 (4.1)     3 (3.9)     9 (4.0)         1.0         1.0 (0.2–3.9)
  Nonhospital
     Household member                                32 (21.6)    7 (9.1)    39 (17.3)        0.02        0.4 (0.1–0.9)
     Community contact                               11 (7.4)     0          11 (4.9)         0.02              -—
     Nonhousehold close contact                       6 (4.1)     0           6 (2.7)         0.10              —-
     Traveler§                                        4 (2.7)     0           4 (1.8)         0.30              —-
     Household visitor                                2 (1.4)     0           2 (<1.0)        0.55              —-
     Other                                            1 (<1.0)    0           1 (<1.0)        1.0               —-

* The risk factors listed were those associated with the greatest degree of exposure according to the definition of close con-
  tact (people who cared for, lived with, or had face-to-face contact [within 1 m] with a person with SARS or direct contact
  with respiratory secretions or body fluids of a person with SARS).
† Fisher’s exact test (two-tailed) was used to determine statistical significance. A two-by-two contingency-table analysis
  was used to compare risk factors in phase 1 and phase 2.
‡ Odds ratios are for phase 2 as compared with phase 1. CI denotes confidence interval.
§ Exposure occurred in a country designated by the WHO as having ongoing transmission of SARS.
¶ The role during exposure indicates a patient’s occupation or role during exposure rather than his or her occupation or
  role in general. For example, a nurse who was exposed at a social gathering was considered a participant in a private
  event rather than a nurse. All but three new travel-related cases could be linked back to the index case.




                                    n engl j med 350;23    www.nejm.org       june 3, 2004                                       2357


                                               The New England Journal of Medicine
                 Downloaded from nejm.org on January 13, 2021. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
                                Copyright © 2004 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
                                                         The   new england journal             of   medicine


                     penetration, a measure of the extent of transmis-                 tion period greater than 10 days (1.7 percent; 95
                     sion beyond the hospital or travel-related setting.               percent confidence interval, 0.0 to 5.0), becoming
                     We defined levels of community penetration as zero                ill on day 12 after exposure. The 20-day attack rate
                     degree (cases that were related to travel or patients             among contacts identified as requiring isolation or
                     who were exposed in the hospital), first degree (cas-             quarantine was 1.0 percent (95 percent confidence
                     es among household contacts of persons with zero-                 interval, 0.8 to 1.1).
                     degree cases; cases among contacts of persons with                    Of the 225 patients with SARS among Toronto
                     first-degree cases among the same household were                  residents, 187 patients recovered (83.1 percent) and
                     also considered first-degree cases), second degree                38 (16.9 percent) died from SARS (Table 1). The av-
                     (cases among contacts of persons with zero-degree                 erage age of the patients with SARS was 49 years
                     or first-degree cases outside households of persons               (range, 5 months to 99 years). Eleven patients (4.9
                     with zero-degree cases [e.g., work and school con-                percent) were less than 18 years of age. Of those
                     tacts]), and third degree (cases among contacts of                who died, 21 (55.3 percent) had been exposed to
                     persons with second-degree cases).                                SARS as hospital inpatients; the average age of per-
                                                                                       sons who died was 71 years (range, 38 to 99).
                                             results
                                                                                       evolution of the outbreak in relation
                     potential, suspect, and probable sars cases                       to control measures
                     Table 1 summarizes the number of cases that we                    Figure 1 plots the SARS epidemic according to the
                     investigated for SARS. Of 2132 persons identified                 onset of symptoms in relation to the implementa-
                     as potentially having SARS, 1907 did not meet the                 tion of control measures. Phase 1 of the outbreak
                     case definition of SARS (Fig. 2). We received the re-             began with the index patient returning to Toronto
                     sults of serologic tests on samples from 129 (57.3                from a visit to Hong Kong. She died at home, of un-
                     percent) of the 225 patients with probable or sus-                recognized SARS, on March 5, 2003. A son of the
                     pect cases of SARS during the convalescent phase.                 index patient was admitted to Hospital A with se-
                     Of these persons, 124 (96.1 percent) had positive                 vere respiratory illness on March 7 and died on
                     tests; 5 had negative tests; and 96 refused testing,              March 13. Within 24 hours, four other ill family
                     died, or could not be contacted.                                  members were put into isolation in four other hos-
                        A subgroup of 59 patients was identified as hav-               pitals. Staff illness in Hospital A was first recog-
                     ing a single point of exposure to SARS. In this sub-              nized on March 21, and the hospital was closed on
                     group, the average incubation period was 4.7 days                 March 25. Further spread in Hospital A and related
                     (range, 1 to 12). Only one patient had an incuba-                 households is described elsewhere.17 The transfer
                                                                                       of inpatients with incubating or unrecognized
                                                                                       SARS between institutions resulted in nosocomial
                                                                                       transmission in additional sites; health care work-
  Table 3. Proportion of SARS Cases According to the Degree of Community
  Penetration.
                                                                                       ers who were employed at more than one site also
                                                                                       transmitted SARS. The mean (±SD) time between
  Community                                                                            the onset of symptoms and the reporting of a case
  Penetration    Phase 1 (N=148) Phase 2 (N=77) Total (N=225)            P Value*
                                                                                       to Toronto Public Health was 3.9±3.2 days. Phase
                                  no. of patients (%)                                  1 also included a cluster of 33 cases related to a
  0 degree†          92 (62.2)          70 (90.9)       162 (72.0)       <0.001        close-knit religious group. When the link to the re-
  1st degree         37 (25.0)           7 (9.1)          44 (19.6)      <0.001        ligious group was recognized, all 500 members
  2nd degree         16 (10.8)           0                16 (7.1)         0.003       were quarantined and evaluated; 3 of the 33 cases
  3rd degree          3 (2.0)            0                 3 (1.3)         0.3         in this cluster were identified in the initial assess-
                                                                                       ment for symptoms.
* A two-by-two contingency-table analysis was used to compare community                    On April 10, 16 days after hospital infection-
  penetration in phase 1 and phase 2. Fisher’s exact test (two-tailed) was used        control measures were implemented provincewide,
  to determine statistical significance. P<0.001 for the difference in combined
  second-degree and third-degree penetration between phase 1 and phase 2.              the daily number of new cases declined (Fig. 1). A
  There can be no third-degree penetration without second-degree penetration.          surge of cases followed within a group of hospital
† In phase 1, there were three travel-related zero-degree cases in addition to the     staff members whose exposures were related to
  index travel-related case. The rest of the patients with zero-degree cases were
  exposed in the hospital.                                                             prolonged resuscitation and intubation in a patient
                                                                                       who was critically ill with SARS in Hospital F. This


2358                                                     n engl j med 350;23       www.nejm.org     june 3 , 2004



                                                       The New England Journal of Medicine
                         Downloaded from nejm.org on January 13, 2021. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
                                        Copyright © 2004 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
                                      outbreak of sars in toronto


resurgence led to the refinement of infection-con-         enforceable quarantine order owing to initial non-
trol measures for high-risk, aerosol-generating pro-       compliance. A breakdown of 316,615 calls to the
cedures.18 After this surge of cases, no new cases         Toronto Public Health SARS hotline is given in Ta-
were recognized for a period of 20 days, and the           ble 1. The most common reason for calling was to
outbreak was believed to be over.                          discuss potential exposures.
   Phase 2 was recognized after a cluster of patients
with a SARS-like illness in a rehabilitation hospital                          discussion
(Hospital I) was traced back to Hospital H.19 Active
screening of patients and a chart review in Hospital       In Toronto, the SARS outbreak took a serious toll
H revealed previously unrecognized cases of SARS           on patients and hospital workers, as well as on
in patients and health care workers. Changes in the        their friends and families. This analysis of data
risk factors for SARS between phases 1 and 2 are           from Toronto Public Health provides insights into
shown in Table 2.                                          the spread of a new communicable disease in rela-
                                                           tion to control measures.
community spread                                               SARS in Toronto was primarily a nosocomial ill-
Community spread as reflected by the degree of             ness, largely restricted to persons who were ex-
community penetration is summarized in Table 3.            posed in affected hospitals and their household
Transmission of SARS occurred in 11 (58 percent)           contacts. The few cases of second-degree and
of Toronto’s acute care hospitals. In addition to the      third-degree community penetration mostly in-
index case, three cases of SARS (1.3 percent) were         volved persons with very close social ties. Despite
related to travel. With the exception of the index         the extremely limited community spread, the WHO
case, early identification and isolation prevented         and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
further spread of the virus from these travel-related      identified Toronto as a SARS-affected area. With a
cases. The proportion of cases with second-degree          predominantly nosocomial illness such as SARS,
and third-degree penetration in phase 1 was sig-           information about community penetration, as de-
nificantly greater than in phase 2 (12.8 percent           scribed here, may be useful in defining SARS-
vs. 0 percent, P<0.001).                                   affected areas.
    In phase 1, instances of second-degree commu-              Enhanced infection-control measures and the
nity penetration included three exposures to SARS          identification and follow-up of contacts resulted in
in doctors’ offices, one prolonged exposure to a           a sharp drop in the transmission of SARS in Toron-
friend with SARS outside of a household, and one           to hospital and outpatient settings. Our analysis
exposure to a close workmate. The cluster of 33            showed two resurgences in the number of cases in
cases related to members of the religious group in-        persons with distinct risk factors that led to specif-
cluded second-degree and third-degree penetra-             ic changes in outbreak-control practices. The first,
tion. The 33 patients included 14 members of an            in phase 1, was related to the intensive care unit in
extended family whose exposure was traced back             Hospital F and led to enhanced infection-control
to 3 family members who were exposed in the emer-          procedures; subsequently, there was no further
gency room of Hospital A (zero-degree penetra-             transmission in intensive care units.18 The second
tion). Eleven patients were exposed in social situ-        resurgence occurred in phase 2 among hospital-
ations, such as a religious retreat, and three in a        ized patients, after enhanced hospital and commu-
doctor’s office (second-degree penetration); SARS          nity infection-control measures had been relaxed
also developed in three members of these patients’         when the outbreak was initially believed over. Re-
households (third-degree penetration). Six pa-             institution of full control measures that were devel-
tients in this cluster were not residents of Toron-        oped in phase 1 resulted in an absence of second-
to, including one who was visiting from the United         degree and third-degree community penetration in
States.                                                    phase 2; in reduced numbers of intensive care unit,
                                                           emergency room, outpatient, and household-relat-
quarantine and calls to the hotline                        ed cases; and in an increased proportion of hospi-
During the outbreak, 23,103 contacts were identi-          tal-ward cases. Active surveillance of hospital-ward
fied as requiring quarantine (Fig. 2). Of those in         patients in phase 2 brought an end to the outbreak.
quarantine, 27 (0.1 percent) were issued a legally             Control efforts succeeded because of intensive



                                n engl j med 350;23   www.nejm.org      june 3, 2004                                  2359


                                           The New England Journal of Medicine
             Downloaded from nejm.org on January 13, 2021. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
                            Copyright © 2004 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
                                       The   new england journal             of   medicine


       follow-up of contacts of the patients, a 10-day quar-       were sensitive for infectious illness and that few, if
       antine period, and the search for cases among con-          any, such cases were missed.
       tacts who were reached more than 10 days after                  Only Toronto Public Health data were available
       their last exposure. SARS may be a seasonal illness,        for this analysis. We excluded data from adjacent
       as are other respiratory viruses; the coming of sum-        municipalities, which may have had different meth-
       mer may have helped to end the outbreak. There              ods of data collection and interpretation. As dis-
       was considerable pressure to lengthen the quaran-           cussed in a recent report from the Canadian govern-
       tine period to 14 days. Our data did not support a          ment, leadership and coordination in the collection,
       quarantine period longer than 10 days, and we in-           management, and sharing of data are critical, as
       stead opted for daily follow-up of symptoms by To-          are strong mechanisms for linking epidemiologic
       ronto Public Health staff or self-monitoring after          and clinical information to laboratory data.21
       discharge from quarantine. The average incuba-                  Our data show that SARS spreads when it is not
       tion period of 4.7 days in Toronto is consistent with       recognized. Once it was recognized, the infection-
       data from Hong Kong.20 SARS developed on day                control measures that were instituted worked well.
       12 in one patient who, while self-monitoring, re-           However, within hospitals, severe restrictions due
       ported to Toronto Public Health; no transmission            to SARS resulted in delays in treatments for cancer
       resulted. Identification of early symptoms of SARS          and surgeries, and the continuous, universal use of
       is much more difficult in persons who are exposed           N95 respirators and other forms of personal pro-
       as inpatients. A longer period of postexposure iso-         tection was stressful for health care workers. Our
       lation and monitoring may be appropriate for this           experience suggests that the spread of SARS-CoV
       medically complex group.                                    by means of respiratory droplets can be controlled
           The number of persons evaluated for SARS, the           in many settings with less restrictive measures (e.g.,
       number requiring quarantine, and the number of              the use of surgical masks in quarantine). Studies
       calls to the public health hotline reflect a much           examining the costs and effectiveness of various
       greater volume of work and burden to the commu-             control measures are under way. During an out-
       nity than might be suggested by case counts alone.          break, health care workers must have a high index
       In hindsight, overrecognition of contacts, espe-            of suspicion for SARS in persons who present with
       cially in two hospitalwide quarantine efforts, may          acute respiratory symptoms and in patients with
       have resulted in an overestimate of the number of           chronic respiratory illness, especially those in the
       persons requiring quarantine. The Toronto SARS              hospital setting in whom fever develops. This ex-
       outbreak came at the tail end of the influenza sea-         perience underlines the need for public health or-
       son, possibly increasing the number of potential            ganizations to become more involved in hospital
       SARS cases, calls to the hotline, and persons re-           surveillance and in the control of nosocomial in-
       quiring quarantine. Prevalent community respira-            fections. Surveillance for unusual infections in trav-
       tory infections can be expected to affect the avail-        elers and adequate public health surge capacity are
       ability of resources that are needed to manage              critical in the light of threats of emerging diseases.
       outbreaks of new SARS-like diseases.                        Data from Toronto show that emerging infectious
           We did not perform serologic tests during the           diseases such as SARS can be controlled in a major
       convalescent phase for all the potential SARS cases         North American urban center if there is a strong,
       that we investigated. As compared with test results,        responsive, and active public health infrastructure.
       the definitions of probable and suspect SARS cases             We are indebted to Erica Clark, Michael Finkelstein, Marg Mul-
                                                                   holland, Gerilynne Nephew, David Salisbury, Mark Alan Toffoli,
       had a positive predictive value of 96.1 percent. A          Nicole Whittingham, Monali Varia, Jann Houston, Margaret Russell,
       sensitivity analysis showed no change in the tests          Paul Fleiszer, Nancy Day, Fred Goettler, Carmelita Zaccaria, Joanne
       of significance presented here, with misclassifica-         Templeton, Andrea Saunders, Rebecca Stuart, Shira Korman, Kam-
                                                                   ran Khan, and Mary Margaret Crapper for important contributions
       tion of up to 8 percent of cases. The absence of            to this article; and to the entire Toronto Public Health SARS Response
       clusters of severe SARS-like illness in persons who         Team and all our colleagues in the front lines of health care for go-
       had no identifiable exposure during the outbreak            ing above and beyond the call of duty in combating the SARS out-
                                                                   break in Toronto.
       and five months later suggests that our definitions




2360                                   n engl j med 350;23   www.nejm.org         june 3 , 2004



                                       The New England Journal of Medicine
         Downloaded from nejm.org on January 13, 2021. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
                        Copyright © 2004 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
                                                outbreak of sars in toronto


references
1. Dyer O. Two strains of the SARS virus         8. Hoey J. Severe acute respiratory syn-         tions for the SARS outbreak period. Rev.
sequenced. BMJ 2003;326:999.                     drome. CMAJ 2003;168:1013.                       Ottawa: Health Canada, November 2003.
2. Marra MA, Jones SJ, Astell CR, et al. The     9. So LK, Lau AC, Yam LY, et al. Develop-        (Accessed May 10, 2004, at http://www.
genome sequence of the SARS-associated           ment of a standard treatment protocol for        hc-sc.gc.ca/pphb-dgspsp/sars-sras/
coronavirus. Science 2003;300:1399-404.          severe acute respiratory syndrome. Lancet        sarscasedef_e.html.)
3. Rota PA, Oberste MS, Monroe SS, et al.        2003;361:1615-7.                                 17. Varia M, Wilson S, Sarwal S, et al.
Characterization of a novel coronavirus asso-    10. Cyranoski D. Critics slam treatment for      Investigation of a nosocomial outbreak of
ciated with severe acute respiratory syn-        SARS as ineffective and perhaps dangerous.       severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
drome. Science 2003;300:1394-9.                  Nature 2003;423:4.                               in Toronto, Canada. CMAJ 2003;169:285-
4. Booth CM, Matukas LM, Tomlinson               11. World Health Organization. Severe acute      92.
GA, et al. Clinical features and short-term      respiratory syndrome — virtual press brief-      18. Cluster of severe acute respiratory syn-
outcomes of 144 patients with SARS in the        ing, 23 April 2003. (Accessed May 10, 2004,      drome cases among protected health-care
greater Toronto area. JAMA 2003;289:2801-        at http://www.who.int/csr/sars/2003_ 04_24/      workers — Toronto, Canada, April 2003.
9. [Erratum, JAMA 2003;290:334.]                 en/print.html.)                                  JAMA 2003;289:2788-9.
5. Poutanen SM, Low DE, Henry B, et al.          12. The impact of SARS on Toronto’s busi-        19. Update: severe acute respiratory syn-
Identification of severe acute respiratory       ness community: a survey of Toronto employ-      drome — Toronto, Canada 2003. MMWR
syndrome in Canada. N Engl J Med 2003;           ers. Toronto: Toronto Board of Trade, May        Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2003;52:547-50.
348:1995-2005.                                   2003.                                            20. Lee N, Hui D, Wu A, et al. A major out-
6. World Health Organization. Cumula-            13. KPMG. Toronto tourism revenue loss           break of severe acute respiratory syndrome
tive number of reported probable cases of        exceeds quarter of a billion. Press release of   in Hong Kong. N Engl J Med 2003;348:
SARS: from: 1 Nov 2002 to: 4 July 2003, 17:00    KPMG Canada, Toronto, July 2, 2003.              1986-94.
GMT+2. (Accessed May 10, 2004, at http://        14. Manley’s comments show lack of under-        21. National Advisory Committee on SARS
www.who.int/csr/sars/country/2003_07_11/         standing of SARS. News release of Canada         and Public Health. Learning from SARS:
en/.)                                            NewsWire, Toronto, June 27, 2003.                renewal of public health in Canada. Ottawa:
7. Idem. Management of severe acute re-          15. 6 Years of accomplishments: annual           Health Canada, October 2003:1-221.
spiratory syndrome (SARS). (Accessed May         report. Toronto: Greater Toronto Airports        Copyright © 2004 Massachusetts Medical Society.
10, 2004, at http://www.who.int/csr/sars/        Authority, 2002.
management/en/.)                                 16. Outbreak period: national case defini-




                                                powerpoint slides of journal figures
                          At the Journal’ s Web site, subscribers can automatically create PowerPoint slides of
                          Journal figures. Click on a figure in the full-text version of any article at www.nejm.org,
                          and then click on PowerPoint Slide for Teaching. A PowerPoint slide containing the
                          image, with its title and reference citation, can then be downloaded and saved.




                                       n engl j med 350;23         www.nejm.org         june 3, 2004                                                2361


                                               The New England Journal of Medicine
                 Downloaded from nejm.org on January 13, 2021. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
                                Copyright © 2004 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
Clinical Infectious Diseases
    MAJOR ARTICLE



The First 100 Days of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) Control in Vietnam
Pham Quang Thai,1,2 Maia A Rabaa,3,4 Duong Huy Luong,5 Dang Quang Tan,6 Tran Dai Quang,6 Ha-Linh Quach,1,7 Ngoc-Anh Hoang Thi,1,7 Phung Cong Dinh,8
Ngu Duy Nghia,1 Tran Anh Tu,1 La Ngoc Quang,9 Tran My Phuc,4 Vinh Chau,4 Nguyen Cong Khanh,1 Dang Duc Anh,1 Tran Nhu Duong,1 Guy Thwaites,3,4
H Rogier van Doorn,3,4 and Marc Choisy3,4; OUCRU COVID-19 Research Group*




                                                                                                                                                                                                        Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/advance-article/doi/10.1093/cid/ciaa1130/5879764 by guest on 13 January 2021
1
 National Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology, Hanoi, Vietnam, 2School of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, Hanoi Medical University, Hanoi, Vietnam, 3Centre for Tropical Medicine and
Global Health, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Ho Chi Minh city, Vietnam, 5Medical Services Administration,
Ministry of Health, Hanoi, Vietnam, 6General Department of Preventive Medicine, Ministry of Health, Hanoi, Vietnam, 7Research School of Population Health, Australian National University, Canberra,
Australia, 8National Agency for Science and Technology Information, Ministry of Science and Technology, Hanoi, Vietnam, and 9Hanoi University of Public Health, Hanoi, Vietnam

   Background. One hundred days after severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) was first reported in
Vietnam on 23 January, 270 cases were confirmed, with no deaths. We describe the control measures used by the government and
their relationship with imported and domestically acquired case numbers, with the aim of identifying the measures associated with
successful SARS-CoV-2 control.
   Methods. Clinical and demographic data on the first 270 SARS-CoV-2 infected cases and the timing and nature of government
control measures, including numbers of tests and quarantined individuals, were analyzed. Apple and Google mobility data provided
proxies for population movement. Serial intervals were calculated from 33 infector-infectee pairs and used to estimate the propor-
tion of presymptomatic transmission events and time-varying reproduction numbers.
   Results. A national lockdown was implemented between 1 and 22 April. Around 200 000 people were quarantined and 266 122
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) tests conducted. Population mobility decreased progressively before lock-
down. In total, 60% (163/270) of cases were imported; 43% (89/208) of resolved infections remained asymptomatic for the duration
of infection. The serial interval was 3.24 days, and 27.5% (95% confidence interval [CI], 15.7%-40.0%) of transmissions occurred
presymptomatically. Limited transmission amounted to a maximum reproduction number of 1.15 (95% CI, .·37–2.·36). No commu-
nity transmission has been detected since 15 April.
   Conclusions. Vietnam has controlled SARS-CoV-2 spread through the early introduction of mass communication, meticulous
contact tracing with strict quarantine, and international travel restrictions. The value of these interventions is supported by the high
proportion of asymptomatic and imported cases, and evidence for substantial presymptomatic transmission.
   Keywords. asymptomatic; COVID-19; epidemic control; SARS-CoV-2; Vietnam.


The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-                                            a basic reproduction number (R0) estimated between 2 and 3
CoV-2) emerged in Wuhan city, Hubei Province, China, in                                               in the absence of control measures [3–6]. Many infections are
late 2019 [1]. On 30 January, the World Health Organization                                           asymptomatic [7], although others lead to symptoms of corona-
(WHO) declared the outbreak a “Public Health Emergency of                                             virus disease 2019 (COVID-19) of varying severity [5]. Analyses
International Concern”, and on 11 March a global pandemic. By                                         of serial intervals suggest that contagiousness can occur both
1 May 2020, the virus had infected more than 3 million people                                         before and after the onset of symptoms as well as in those who
and killed over 200 000.                                                                              never develop symptoms [8]. The subsequent exponential rise
   SARS-CoV-2 is antigenically different from known human                                             in infections has threatened to overwhelm even the world’s best
and zoonotic coronaviruses, and there is no known preexisting                                         developed health systems and cause major loss of life. Methods
population immunity [2]. It is highly transmissible through                                           to control the virus and reduce the impact of COVID-19 have
respiratory secretions expelled from an infected person, with                                         thus become a global priority.
                                                                                                         The preparedness, timing, and nature of the response to SARS-
                                                                                                      CoV-2 have varied substantially between countries. Many affected
   Received 2 June 2020; editorial decision 28 July 2020; published online 1 August 2020.
                                                                                                      countries have resorted to extreme social distancing measures
   *Members listed in the acknowledgments.
   Correspondence: D. D. Anh, Director, National Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology, Hanoi,        through so-called lockdowns, where populations isolate them-
Vietnam (dda@nihe.org.vn).                                                                            selves within their homes, reducing all but essential contact with
Clinical Infectious Diseases®  2020;XX(XX):1–9
                                                                                                      others. As first observed in Hubei Province in China, and sub-
© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society
of America. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons        sequently in other countries, these measures slow transmission
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted         and reduce disease incidence [9–11] but at significant social and
reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciaa1130                                                                             economic cost. However, lockdowns represent a combination of


                                                                                                           SARS-CoV-2 Control in Vietnam • cid 2020:XX (XX XXXX) • 1
potentially independent interventions (eg, closing schools and              We used a logistic regression to investigate the link between
universities, suspending public transport, banning public gather-        the proportion of asymptomatic infections and age, sex, nation-
ings, closing nonessential businesses), the effects of which in iso-     ality (Vietnamese vs non-Vietnamese), and imported versus
lation are uncertain. Determining their relative contributions to        domestically acquired infection. We used a gamma regression
SARS-CoV-2 control is critical to understanding how they might           to investigate the link between the duration of hospitalization
be safely and incrementally lifted or partially reinstated. Such in-     and the same variables listed above, plus symptomatic versus
formation may be acquired from studying the measures employed            asymptomatic. To correct for potential confounding effects be-
by countries that have so far controlled the virus.                      tween the explanatory variables, we used Type-II likelihood
   Vietnam is a low-middle income country that shares bor-               ratio tests [16]. All analyses were done with R 4.0.0 [17] using
ders with China, The Lao People’s Democratic Republic, and               the packages car [16] 3.0–76, EpiEstim [18] 2.2-1, fitdistrplus




                                                                                                                                             Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/advance-article/doi/10.1093/cid/ciaa1130/5879764 by guest on 13 January 2021
Cambodia. It is the 15th most populous country on earth, with            [19] 1.0–14, incidence [20] 1.7.17, and mvtnorm [21] 1.1–05,
97.3 million people, and it was one of the first countries affected      with additional details in the Supplementary Appendix.
by SARS-CoV-2, recording its first case on 23 January 2020. Yet
by 1 May, 270 cases were confirmed, with no deaths [12]. Here
                                                                         RESULTS
we present a descriptive study that aims to characterize and
quantify measures used for SARS-CoV-2 and characteristics of             Epidemic Description and Control Measures
the cases in Vietnam during the first 100 days of the epidemic.          On 10 January, before the first case was confirmed in Vietnam,
Our aim was to identify the measures most closely associated             the Vietnam government reinforced temperature and health
with successful SARS-CoV-2 control.                                      status screening at border gates for passengers arriving from
                                                                         Wuhan, tracing and quarantining of suspected cases and their
                                                                         contacts, monitoring of suspected cases of respiratory infections
METHODS
                                                                         in hospitals and the community, and initiated mass communi-
Clinical, epidemiological, and policy data were provided by              cation to the public on preventive measures (hand washing,
Vietnam’s National Steering Committee for COVID-19 re-                   contact avoidance, and mask wearing).
sponse. Data from 270 SARS-CoV-2-confirmed cases to 1 May                   The epidemic timeline for Vietnam, including the numbers
2020 included their age, sex, nationality, dates of symptom              quarantined and hospitalised, tests performed, cases confirmed,
onset (if any), entry to the country and quarantine (if any), hos-       population movements, and the timing and nature of major
pital admission and discharge, and the results of reverse tran-          government-led control measures are summarized in Figure 1.
scription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) tests. Imported             The control measures are summarised in Table 1 and Table S1.
cases were distinguished from those acquired domestically,               To date, 2 waves of transmission have occurred: the first began
with information on quarantine at or after entry to the country.         on 23 January and resulted in 16 cases (9 imported, 7 acquired
Imported cases were denoted G0; and among domestically ac-               in-country), and the second on 6 March, leading to 254 cases
quired infections, those acquired directly from G0 cases were            (154 imported, 100 acquired in-country).
denoted as G1, and others were denoted G2+.                                 The first confirmed cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection pre-
   Intervention data consisted of daily time-series of the num-          sented in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City during the lunar New
bers in quarantine and RT-PCR tests performed. Daily reports             Year holiday (23–9 January). Cases were travellers from Wuhan
from the Ministry of Health and Vietnam’s National Steering              city or their contacts and were identified by the public health
Committee for COVID-19 response listed key milestones in na-             laboratory network using improvised molecular diagnostics,
tional SARS-CoV-2 control measures. Apple mobility data [13]             including agnostic sequencing, prior to implementation of
and Google community mobility data [14] provided proxies of              the World Health Organization (WHO)-approved assays [22].
population movements, with additional information provided               Among the cases were the first confirmed human-to-human
in the Supplementary Appendix.                                           transmissions outside of China [23].
   Serial intervals were calculated from dates of symptoms onset            Entry of airline passengers into Vietnam from Wuhan city
of infector-infectee pairs identified by contact tracing and fitted to   and elsewhere in China was monitored and progressively lim-
a normal distribution by maximum likelihood [8]. The estimated           ited (Table 1), and cases and their contacts were quarantined for
distribution parameters (mean and standard deviation, together           14 days in government facilities to prevent onward transmis-
with their confidence intervals and variance-covariance matrix)          sion. Schools and universities remained closed after the lunar
were used to estimate the proportion of presymptomatic transmis-         New Year holiday, with staggered reopening from 4 May (clos-
sions and 3 time-varying reproduction numbers [15]: between G0           ures lasted ~3 months). The National Steering Committee for
and G1 (step 1), between G1 and G2+ (step 2), and between G0,            COVID-19 response was established in late January, composed
G1, and G2+ combined (step 1 and 2 combined) (further details in         of 24 members from 23 ministries charged with coordinating
the Supplementary Appendix).                                             the epidemic response. A hotline was set up by the Ministry


2 • cid 2020:XX (XX XXXX) • Thai et al
                                                                                                                                                                                   Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/advance-article/doi/10.1093/cid/ciaa1130/5879764 by guest on 13 January 2021
Figure 1. Timeline of SARS-CoV-2 emergence and response in Vietnam. Background color reflects the intensity of the interventions taken by the Vietnam government to
control the COVID-19 epidemic, with darker shades indicating more intense disease control measures. The main events of these periods are described in detail in Table 1. A,
Number of people in isolation by day. B, Relative indexes of population movements: number of travellers by car (c), on foot (f) (both from Apple Mobility Data [13]), proxies
of people in retail and recreation areas (r), in groceries stores and pharmacies (g), in parks (p), in bus transit stations (t), at work (w), and at home (h), all from Google
Community Mobility Data [14]. Hashed area indicates the lunar New Year holiday (23–29 January). Traditionally, the first half of the week is spent at home with close family,
whereas the second half of the week is dedicated to visits of members of the extended family. C, Number of SARS-CoV-2 positive cases hospitalised and RT-PCR tests per-
formed by day. D, Cumulative number of detected SARS-CoV-2 positive cases in Vietnam, differentiating imported cases (G0) and whether they were isolated at entry or
later, and locally transmitted cases and whether they were in direct contact with imported cases (G1) or not (G2+). E, Numbers of SARS-CoV-2 imported cases together with
cumulative numbers of local transmissions. Circled characters indicate major internal transmission events: first introduction of SARS-CoV-2 virus in the country (1: 16 cases),
second introduction (2: 15 cases), cluster of transmission in a Ho Chi Minh City bar (B: 19 cases), cluster of transmission in a large Hanoi hospital (H: 17 cases), community
cluster of transmission linked to the Hanoi hospital through catering staff (T: 28 cases) and community cluster of transmission in Me Linh district in the north of Hanoi (M: 13
cases). F–H, Estimates of the reproduction number for the 2 epidemics. Panel G focuses only on the first step of the chain of transmission between G0 and G1, whereas panel
H focuses on all the other steps of the chain of transmission. Panel F includes all detected cases. The shaded blue area shows the 95% confidence intervals. Abbreviations:
COVID-19, coronavirus disease 2019; RT-PCR, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction; SARS-COV-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2.

                                                                                               SARS-CoV-2 Control in Vietnam • cid 2020:XX (XX XXXX) • 3
Table 1. Timing and Nature of Major Vietnam Government-led Control Measures, Including International Border Control, Internal Control, and Ministry of
Health-led Communications

Control measures at international borders

Phase        Date                               Event

             3 January                          Strengthening of border control measures announced by the government
             22 January                         Monitoring of body temperature and health status at border gates; early case detection and contact tracing with man-
                                                 datory quarantine started
             28 January to 5 February           Suspension of all flights from China; suspension of tourist visas to foreigners who have been in China; enhanced con-
                                                  trol of Vietnam-China border; 14-day mandatory quarantine for all travelers who have come from COVID-19 affected
                                                  areas in China
             23–28 February                     Medical declarations for all incoming visitors from Korea; all flights from affected zones diverted to secondary airports




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/advance-article/doi/10.1093/cid/ciaa1130/5879764 by guest on 13 January 2021
                                                 outside of HCMC and Hanoi
             28 February                        Mandatory 14-day quarantine for all travelers entering Vietnam from a COVID-19 affected country
             15–18 March                        Visa suspension for all non-Vietnamese citizens for at least 30 days
             21–22 March                        Mandatory 14-day quarantine at centralized facilities for all arriving travelers, regardless of origin;
                                                suspension of entry to all foreigners (except for diplomatic and official purposes)
             21–23 March                        Vietnam Airlines suspends routes with Singapore, Thailand, Indonesia, Laos, Myanmar, UK, and Japan
             27 March                           All individuals entering the country from March 8 onward required to declare and update their health status to aid sur-
                                                   veillance; strict control of all entrants by road, sea and air, especially shared borders with Laos and Cambodia
             1 April                            Closure of main and auxiliary border gates
Internal control measures
Phase        Date                               Event
             20 January                         22 hospitals chosen for the treatment of suspected COVID-19
             30 January to 4 May                All schools and universities closed following lunar New Year holiday
             Late January to early Feb-         Field hospitals and quarantine centres established in major cities and near border crossings
               ruary
             2–16 February                      Announcement that the Vietnam Social Insurance health fund will cover SARS-CoV-2 tests and treatment; commune in
                                                  Vinh Phuc province, Hanoi (10 600 people) quarantined; accelerated domestic production and supply of PPE
             16–20 March                        Enforcement of mask wearing at public places; crowds over 50 people discouraged; entertainment services closed
             21 March 21                        Mandatory Health Declaration required for passengers on domestic flights and trains; religious services suspended
             25 March 25 to 22 April            Amusement parks, restaurants, catering businesses, billiard clubs, gyms, spas, hair salons close in Ho Chi Minh City
             1–22 April                         Declaration of COVID-19 epidemic in Vietnam. Country-wide lockdown implemented; mandatory mask-wearing in
                                                  public; banning of public gatherings of >2 people; nonessential movement outside of residence discouraged; public
                                                  transportation and taxi services halted
             23 April                           Lockdown measures relaxed, some nonessential businesses remain closed; increased frequency of domestic flights
             4–11 May                           Staggered reopening of schools and universities
Ministry of Health-led Communications
Phase        Date                               Event
             9 January onward                   Dissemination of information advising on the disease situation in China and to maintain calm
             20 January                         Updated information concerning the epidemic and case numbers provided every 2 hours on MoH websites ncov.moh.
                                                  gov.vn and ncov.vncdc.gov.vn
             27 January                         Telephone hotline number announced to receive information and opinions on the epidemic and to advise on personal
                                                   disease prevention
             2 February                         Technology-based communication plan established to inform population: SMS to all mobile subscribers; videos and
                                                  infographics disseminated through mass media, social networks, digital platforms such as Facebook, Zalo, YouTube
             8 February                         Vietnam Health App and website launched by MoH to provide information on COVID-19 and disease prevention for the
                                                   people and healthcare workers
             14 February                        Announcement and education around 14-day isolation period for COVID-19 cases and contacts; coordinate with Vi-
                                                  etnam Television (VTV) to enhance education and messaging
             23 February                        Release of pop song, Ghen Cô Vy (English: Jealous Coronavirus), to promote handwashing, social distancing, not
                                                  touching one’s face, and keeping their environment clean
             2 March                            MoH coordinates with Vietnam Television (VTV 24) to develop daily broadcast on the COVID-19 epidemic
             19 March                           Mandatory use of the Hanoi Smart City app to monitor the health and movement of recovered confirmed cases, sus-
                                                 pected cases, and people under quarantine
             22 March                           Recommendation that people over 60 years stay at home; recommendation that everyone wear a mask when outside
                                                  of the home and practice good hygiene
             18 April                           Release of Bluezone mobile application that uses BLE low-power Bluetooth positioning technology to identify and track
                                                  and communicate with F1 and F2 contacts when positive cases are detected
Further details are provided in Table S1. The colors shown in the phase column indicate the intensity of control measures taken over different periods (white, initial; light yellow, early; light
orange, intermediate; orange, preepidemic; brown, epidemic/lockdown; dark orange, postlockdown), and correspond to those used in Figure 1 and Table S1.
Abbreviations: COVID-19, coronavirus disease 2019; MoH, Ministry of Health; PPE, personal protective equipment; SARS-CoV-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2.




4 • cid 2020:XX (XX XXXX) • Thai et al
of Health on 27 January, a nationwide SMS push notification            was partially lifted on 23 April. On 15 April, the last case of wave
system was put in place through all mobile phone providers             2 was identified; subsequent cases (n = 2) have been detected
on 3 February, and a mobile phone app for contact tracing and          between 15 April and 1 May (time of writing) among interna-
symptom reporting was launched on 8 February.                          tional travellers quarantined on arrival.
   In early February, following the repatriation of a number of
Vietnamese nationals from Wuhan city, a cluster of community           Characteristics of the Cases
transmitted infections was detected in 2 communes in Vinh              Sixty percent (163/270) of cases were imported (Table 2,
Phuc province, bordering Hanoi [24, 25]. On 13 February, these         Figure 2); 110 were quarantined and tested positive on entry,
communes were quarantined for 3 weeks, with no additional              whereas 53 entered prior to the implementation of systematic
cases detected in the country until 6 March and the start of the       quarantine measures and were identified in the community.




                                                                                                                                              Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/advance-article/doi/10.1093/cid/ciaa1130/5879764 by guest on 13 January 2021
second wave of infections in Hanoi.                                    Vietnamese nationals represented 134/163 (82.2%) of the im-
   This second wave began on 6 March following diagnosis of            ported cases and 89/107 (83.2%) of those acquired in-country.
the index case, who had arrived in Hanoi on 2 March from               The median age of imported and domestically acquired cases
London after visiting Italy and the United Kingdom. Following          was 27 years (interquartile range [IQR] 21–42) and 41 years
their identification, all passengers and crew on the flight from       (IQR 28–49), and 81/163 (49.7%) and 69/107 (64.5%) of these
London with the index case were quarantined in government              were female, respectively.
facilities for 14 days, as were all individuals in direct contact         By 1 May, 208 patients were discharged, and 62 remained
with the index or any subsequent cases. The immediate neigh-           hospitalized for treatment or isolated. Forty-three percent
borhood of the index case was sealed off, with active surveil-         (89/208) of discharged cases never developed symptoms, and
lance conducted to detect any new cases. These surveillance            this was not significantly associated with age, sex, nationality,
measures revealed SARS-CoV-2 infection in 12 others on the             or origin of infection (imported or domestically acquired).
flight and 2 close contacts of the infected traveller after entering   Among all the symptomatic cases, 25.3% (38/150) developed
Vietnam.                                                               symptoms in a government quarantine facility. Among the
   Further cases occurred in the following 2 weeks, mostly             imported cases who developed symptoms, 73.9% (68/92)
in foreign and returning Vietnamese travellers from Europe             did so after entry to the country (Figure 3A, see Table S4 for
and the United States, including multiple acquisitions in a Ho         the numbers of symptomatic in imported and nonimported
Chi Minh City bar on 14 March (19 cases), a cluster among              cases). The median age of symptomatic and asymptomatic
nursing (17 cases) and catering (28 cases) staff in a large            cases was 30 (IQR 24–49) and 31 (IQR 23–45), respectively
Hanoi hospital, and a community cluster in Me Linh district            (no significant effect of age on the probability to develop
(13 cases), in the north of Hanoi. Systematic layered testing          symptoms, Figure 3C). Among the 150 with symptoms, 21
and quarantine requirements were put in place for cases (F0)           (14.0%) developed severe disease, of whom 5 required me-
and their direct (F1) and indirect (F2–4) contacts. Cases were         chanical ventilation and 2 received extracorporeal mem-
isolated in assigned hospitals until tested negative at least          brane oxygenation. No fatalities were recorded. The duration
twice by RT-PCR. F1 and F2 contacts were quarantined for               of hospitalization was significantly shorter (P < .0001) for
at least 14 days in dedicated facilities (health centers, hotels,      asymptomatic (17 days, IQR 13–22) than for symptomatic
military camps) with negative tests required before release.           cases (19 days, IQR 16–25). Although sex, nationality, and
F3 and F4 contacts were asked to self-quarantine for 14 days.          origin of infection did not have any significant effect, the du-
Until 1 May, around 70 000 have been quarantined in gov-               ration of hospitalization of symptomatic cases increased with
ernment facilities and around 140 000 at home or in hotels.            age (with a discharge rate decreasing by 1.24% for every year
In total, 266 122 RT-PCR-based SARS-CoV-2 tests were per-              older, P = .0060) (Figure 3B).
formed, with a ratio of around 1 positive person: 1000 tests
conducted.                                                             Epidemiological Parameters Over Time
   After further measures to prevent entry of infected interna-        From 33 infector-infectee pairs, the mean serial interval was
tional travellers (Table 1), a nationwide lockdown was enforced        estimated to be 3.24 days (95% confidence interval [CI],
on 1 April, including closure of all shops except gas stations,        1.38–5.10 days) with a standard deviation of the distribu-
food stores, and pharmacies; suspension of public transport,           tion of 5.46 days (95% CI, 4.14–6.78 days). An estimated
including all taxis; and mandatory mask wearing in all public          27.5% (95% CI, 15.7%–40.0%) of the distribution was below
spaces. Mobility data show that population movement de-                zero, suggesting these transmissions occurred prior to the
creased substantially after the start of the second infection wave     onset of symptoms in the infector (Figure 3D). From the
in early March, reaching a nadir in early April at the start of the    (nonquarantined) imported cases (G0) and onward infected
lockdown (Figure 1B). Movements increased slowly during the            cases (G1 and G2+), we calculated the effective reproduc-
last week of the lockdown and more rapidly once the lockdown           tive number R by date (Figure 1F–H). Limited transmission


                                                                          SARS-CoV-2 Control in Vietnam • cid 2020:XX (XX XXXX) • 5
Table 2. Clinical and Demographic Characteristics of SARS-CoV-2                          nationwide lockdown. When analyzing R from G0 to G1 (step
Patients
                                                                                         1) and from G1 to G2+ (step 2) separately, we found that R was
                                                                                         drastically decreased for step 1 simultaneously with suspen-
                                         Asymptomatics              Symptomatics
                                                                                         sion of all international travel (18 March), whereas for step 2,
N                                        120                        150
                                                                                         transmission continues with R slightly above 1 despite intense
Age (years)                              31 (IQR: 23–45)            30 (IQR: 24–49)
Proportion females                       54.2%                      56.7%                contact tracing and quarantine. Only during the nationwide
Proportion G0                            57.5%                      62.7%                lockdown R was reduced to <1 (Figure 1F and 1G).
Proportion G1                            6.7%                       15.3%
Proportions G2+                          35.8%                      22.0%
Proportion Vietnamese                    82.5%                      82.7%                DISCUSSION
Hospitalization duration (days)a         17 (IQR: 13–22)            19 (IQR: 16–25)




                                                                                                                                                                            Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/advance-article/doi/10.1093/cid/ciaa1130/5879764 by guest on 13 January 2021
                                                                                         On 23 January 2020, Vietnam was one of the first countries to
Proportion in quarantine on arrivalb     44.2%                      38.0%
Abbreviations: IQR, interquartile range; SARS-CoV-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome
                                                                                         report SARS-CoV-2 infection and the first to report human-to-
coronavirus 2.                                                                           human transmission outside of China [23]. Yet 100 days later,
a
  For those discharged only (ie, n = 89 for the asymptomatics and n = 119 for the
symptomatic.                                                                             it confirmed just 270 cases despite extensive testing, with no
                                                                                         community transmission since 15 April. In the 3 weeks prior to
b
  For G0 only.

                                                                                         1 May, there were only 2 imported cases and no reported cases
amounted to a maximum R of 1.15 (95% CI, .37–2.36). R rarely                             elsewhere in the country. The nature, timing, and success of the
exceeded 1, and a decrease of R is seen as more mitigating                               control measures introduced may have relevance to other coun-
measures were implemented from the end of March before the                               tries seeking to control SARS-CoV-2 transmission.




Figure 2. Demographics of the 270 SARS-CoV-2 positive cases in Vietnam. Age distribution for the 163 imported cases (left column) and the 107 cases of local transmission
(right column), by nationality (top row) and sex (bottom row). Abbreviation: SARS-CoV-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2.

6 • cid 2020:XX (XX XXXX) • Thai et al
                                                                                                                                                                                        Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/advance-article/doi/10.1093/cid/ciaa1130/5879764 by guest on 13 January 2021
Figure 3. Asymptomatic and symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection in Vietnam. A, Distribution of the interval between entry into the country and the onset of symptoms
for 92 symptomatic imported SARS-CoV-2 positive cases, differentiating those who were isolated at entry from those who were not. Symptoms occurred after entry on the
right-hand side of the vertical red line. B, Duration of hospital stay of 208 discharged SARS-CoV-2 positive cases. Dots and error bars show mean and 95% confidence interval
(assuming a gamma distribution) per decile of age, lines and shaded areas show gamma regression fits and their 95% confidence intervals. Corresponding gamma regression
table is in Table S2. C, Relationship between age and the proportion asymptomatic among 208 discharged SARS-CoV-2 positive cases. Vertical dotted lines indicate deciles
of the age distribution, with the proportion asymptomatic estimated within each of these deciles. Vertical error bars show 95% confidence intervals. Horizontal line and
the gray area show the average across ages and its 95% confidence interval. Corresponding logistic regression table is in Table S3. D, Distribution of serial intervals for 33
infector-infectee pairs together with a normal distribution fitted to it. The shaded area shows the 95% confidence interval. The vertical black line shows the estimate of the
mean serial interval, together with its 95% confidence interval (dashed vertical lines). The proportion of the distribution to the left of the red line is a proxy for the proportion
of infections that occur before the onset of symptoms. Abbreviation: SARS-CoV-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2.


   Vietnam has experience in responding to emerging infec-                                   other country has implemented quarantine in this manner.
tious diseases. In the last 20 years, it has confronted outbreaks                            In total, 266 122 RT-PCR tests were performed, primarily in
of SARS [26], avian and pandemic influenza [27, 28], hand-                                   those quarantined, giving a ratio of tests conducted per positive
foot-and-mouth disease [29], measles [30], and dengue [31]. Its                              person (~1000:1) or, equivalently, about 200 tested people per
outbreak responses are coordinated by the Ministry of Health,                                positive case.
a permanent national Public Health Emergency Operations                                         The majority of cases (60%) in Vietnam were imported from
Center at the National Institute for Hygiene and Epidemiology,                               COVID-19 affected countries: first from China and then from
and through a network of provincial Centers for Disease                                      Europe and the United States. Early introduction of airport
Control and lower level preventive medicine centers [32].                                    screening, followed by quarantine of all arrivals and the even-
   Two waves of SARS-CoV-2 infections have occurred over the                                 tual suspension of nearly all international flights prevented fur-
last 100 days in Vietnam, with community transmission actively                               ther introductions, allowing greater focus on the detection and
interrupted by rapid isolation and identification of primary and                             prevention of domestic transmission. Consistent government
secondary cases and their contacts. Around 200 000 people                                    communication of disease risk and prevention strategies from 3
spent at least 14 days in quarantine. Among those quarantined,                               February may have contributed to declines in population move-
many were second degree contacts (F2); to our knowledge, no                                  ment prior to the nationwide lockdown, particularly in March,


                                                                                                  SARS-CoV-2 Control in Vietnam • cid 2020:XX (XX XXXX) • 7
when all mobile phone users received 10 SMS push notifica-          EPILOGUE
tions from the Ministry of Health in addition to information        There has been no case of community transmission during
provided through other media; these early reductions in popu-       the 99 days between 16 April and 24 July. Lockdown measures
lation movement may have contributed to lowering the repro-         have been progressively lifted and schools, universities, non-
duction number. The majority of imported cases were <30 years       essential shops, karaoke bars, and places for mass gatherings
old, and most of those that acquired the infection domestically     have reopened. An additional 146 cases have been confirmed
were <40 years, which may explain the low numbers with severe       on arrival among repatriated Vietnamese nationals, and they
disease and absence of deaths.                                      have subsequently been isolated. Over the 5 days before sub-
   The high proportion of cases that developed symptoms after       mission (27 July 2020), 14 new cases of community transmis-
isolation (73.9%) or never developed symptoms (43%) high-           sion of unknown origin have been detected in the fifth largest




                                                                                                                                                           Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/advance-article/doi/10.1093/cid/ciaa1130/5879764 by guest on 13 January 2021
lights one of the major challenges of controlling SARS-CoV-2        city in Vietnam, bringing the total number of cases to 431 and
and the strengths of Vietnam’s approach. Suspected cases were       sparking another large public health response.
identified and quarantined based on their epidemiological risk
of infection (recent contact with a confirmed case or travel to a   Supplementary Data
COVID-19 affected country), rather than on exhibiting symp-         Supplementary materials are available at Clinical Infectious Diseases online.
toms. Without the implementation of strong control measures         Consisting of data provided by the authors to benefit the reader, the posted
                                                                    materials are not copyedited and are the sole responsibility of the authors, so
and meticulous contact tracing, it is likely such cases would
                                                                    questions or comments should be addressed to the corresponding author.
have silently transmitted the virus and undermined other con-
trol efforts.                                                       Notes
   The strength of our report is that it provides a complete           OUCRU COVID-19 Research Group Members:
picture based on national data of case numbers, their clinical         Mary Chambers, Marc Choisy, Jeremy Day, Dong Huu Khanh Trinh,
                                                                    Dong Thi Hoai Tam, Joseph Donovan, Du Hong Duc, Ronald B Geskus,
and demographic characteristics, and the testing performed          Ho Quang Chanh, Ho Van Hien, Huong Dang Thao, Huynh le Anh Huy,
and various interventions made by the government over time.         Huynh Ngan Ha, Huynh Trung Trieu, Huynh Xuan Yen, Evelyne Kestelyn,
Furthermore, the use of systematic quarantine measures al-          Thomas Kesteman, Lam Anh Nguyet, Lam Minh Yen, Katrina Lawson, Le
                                                                    Kim Thanh, Le Nguyen Truc Nhu, Le Thanh Hoang Nhat, Le Thi Hoang
lowed clear distinction between imported and domestically ac-
                                                                    Lan, Le Van Tan, Sonia Odette Lewycka, Nguyen Bao Tran, Nguyen Minh
quired cases, thus allowing for estimation of the efficiency of     Nguyet, Nguyen Than Ha Quyen, Nguyen Thanh Ngoc, Nguyen Thi Han
various interventions. The limitations are that the data are de-    Ny, Nguyen Thi Hong Thuong, Nguyen Thi Huyen Trang, Nguyen Thi Kim
scriptive, contain relatively small numbers of confirmed cases,     Tuyen, Nguyen Thi Ngoc Diep, Nguyen Thi Phuong Dung, Nguyen Thi
                                                                    Tam, Nguyen Thi Thu Hong, Nguyen Thu Trang, Nguyen Van Vinh Chau,
and only include the first 100 days of an epidemic that is likely   Nguyen Xuan Truong, Ninh Thi Thanh Van, Phan Nguyen Quoc Khanh,
to continue for many months. It is therefore impossible to con-     Phung Khanh Lam, Phung Le Kim Yen, Phung Tran Huy Nhat, Maia Rabaa,
clude definitively which of these control measures have resulted    Thuong Nguyen Thuy Thuong, Guy Thwaites, Louise Thwaites, Tran My
                                                                    Phuc, Tran Tan Thanh, Tran Thi Bich Ngoc, Tran Tinh Hien, H Rogier van
in the current control of SARS-CoV-2 in Vietnam and whether         Doorn, Jennifer Van Nuil, Vinh Chau, Vu Thi Ngoc Bich, Vu Thi Ty Hang,
they will continue to work in the future.                           Sophie Yacoub.
   There are, however, 2 distinctive features of Vietnam’s re-         Acknowledgments. We acknowledge important contributions and guide-
                                                                    lines from the following institutions and committees: Vietnam National
sponse. First, the government acted quickly, educating and en-
                                                                    Steering Committee for COVID-19 Prevention and Control, Ministry of
gaging the public, placing restrictions on international flights,   Health, Ministry of Science and Technology, National Institute of Hygiene
closing schools and universities, and instituting exhaustive        and Epidemiology and Pasteur Institutes. We also recognize Associate Prof.
case-contact tracing from late January, well before these meas-     Bui The Duy, the director of the Rapid Response Information Team of the
                                                                    National Steering Committee for COVID-19 Response for his suggestions
ures were advised by WHO. Second, they placed the identifica-       and support in the course of the investigation. We thank health-care workers
tion, serial testing, and minimum 14-day isolation of all direct    from Provincial Centers of Disease Control, COVID-19 assigned hospitals
contacts of cases, regardless of symptom development, at the        and local authorities from provinces and cities in Vietnam for their work
                                                                    in case finding, contact tracing, disease control and prevention measures.
heart of the response. Our findings suggest the latter measure         Financial support. M. R., G. T., H. R. v. D., M. C. and the OUCRU
was likely to be especially effective given nearly half of those    COVID-19 research group are supported by the Wellcome Trust.
infected did not develop symptoms.                                     Potential conflicts of interest. The authors: No reported conflicts of
                                                                    interest. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of
   In summary, Vietnam controlled SARS-CoV-2 spread by
                                                                    Potential Conflicts of Interest.
acting early, maintaining clear and consistent public communi-
cations, introducing meticulous contact tracing and quarantine,     References
and implementing progressive international travel restrictions.      1. Zhu N, Zhang D, Wang W, et al. A novel coronavirus from patients with pneu-
                                                                        monia in China, 2019. N Engl J Med 2020; 382:727–33.
The value of these interventions in controlling the infection is     2. Zheng M, Song L. Novel antibody epitopes dominate the antigenicity of spike
supported by the high proportion of asymptomatic cases and              glycoprotein in SARS-CoV-2 compared to SARS-CoV. Cell Mol Immunol 2020;
                                                                        17:1–3.
imported cases, and evidence for substantial presymptomatic
                                                                     3. Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, et al. Early transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China, of novel
transmission.                                                           coronavirus–infected pneumonia. N Engl J Med 2020; 382:1199–207.


8 • cid 2020:XX (XX XXXX) • Thai et al
 4. Sanche S, Lin YT, Xu C, Romero-Severson E, Hengartner N, Ke R. High conta-          18. Cori A. EpiEstim: estimate time varying reproduction numbers from epidemic
    giousness and rapid spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2.          curves. 2019. Available at: https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=EpiEstim.
    Emerg Infect Dis 2020; 26:1199.                                                     19. Delignette-Muller ML, Dutang C. fitdistrplus: an R package for fitting distribu-
 5. Fu L, Wang B, Yuan T, et al. Clinical characteristics of coronavirus disease 2019       tions. J Stat Softw 2015; 64:1–34.
    (COVID-19) in China: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Infect 2020;          20. Kamvar ZN, Cai J, Pulliam JRC, Schumacher J, Jombart T. Epidemic curves made
    80:656–65.                                                                              easy using the R package incidence [version 1; referees: awaiting peer review].
 6. Zhang S, Diao M, Yu W, Pei L, Lin Z, Chen D. Estimation of the reproductive             F1000Research 2019; 8. doi:10.12688/f1000research.18002.1
    number of novel coronavirus (COVID-19) and the probable outbreak size on            21. Genz A, Bretz F, Miwa T, et al. mvtnorm: multivariate normal and t distributions.
    the Diamond Princess cruise ship: a data-driven analysis. Int J Infect Dis 2020;        2020. Available at: https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=mvtnorm
    93:201–4.                                                                           22. Le TQM, Takemura T, Moi ML, et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome corona-
 7. Mizumoto K, Kagaya K, Zarebski A, Chowell G. Estimating the asymptomatic                virus 2 shedding by travelers, Vietnam, 2020. Emerg Infect Dis 2020; 26:727.
    proportion of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) cases on board the diamond        23. Phan LT, Nguyen TV, Luong QC, et al. Importation and human-to-human trans-
    princess cruise ship, Yokohama, Japan, 2020. Eurosurveillance 2020; 25:2000180.         mission of a novel coronavirus in Vietnam. N Engl J Med 2020; 382:872–4.
 8. Du Z, Xu X, Wu Y, Wang L, Cowling BJ, Meyers LA. Serial interval of COVID-19        24. Thanh HN, Van TN, Thu HNT, et al. Outbreak investigation for COVID-19 in
    among publicly reported confirmed cases. Emerg Infect Dis 2020; 26:300.                 northern Vietnam. Lancet Infect Dis 2020; 20:535–6.




                                                                                                                                                                                Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/advance-article/doi/10.1093/cid/ciaa1130/5879764 by guest on 13 January 2021
 9. Thornton J. Covid-19: A&E visits in England fall by 25% in week after lockdown.     25. Le HT, Nguyen LV, Tran DM, et al. The first infant case of COVID-19 acquired
    BMJ 2020; 369:m1401.                                                                    from a secondary transmission in Vietnam. Lancet Child Adolesc Health 2020;
10. Lau H, Khosrawipour V, Kocbach P, et al. The positive impact of lockdown in             4:405–6.
    Wuhan on containing the COVID-19 outbreak in China. J Travel Med 2020.              26. Vu HT, Leitmeyer KC, Le DH, et al. Clinical description of a completed outbreak
    doi:10.1093/jtm/taaa037/5808003                                                         of SARS in Vietnam, February–May 2003. Emerg Infect Dis 2004; 10:334–8.
11. Fisher D, Wilder-Smith A. The global community needs to swiftly ramp up the         27. Tran TH, Nguyen TL, Nguyen TD, et al; World Health Organization International
    response to contain COVID-19. Lancet 2020; 395:1109–10.                                 Avian Influenza Investigative Team. Avian influenza A (H5N1) in 10 patients in
12. TRANG TIN and COVID-19 - Bộ Y tế - Trang tin về dịch bệnh viêm đường hô hấp             Vietnam. N Engl J Med 2004; 350:1179–88.
    cấp. COVID-19. Available at: https://ncov.moh.gov.vn/. Accessed 7 May 2020.         28. Hien TT, Boni MF, Bryant JE, et al. Early pandemic influenza (2009 H1N1) in Ho
13. Apple LLC. Apple COVID-19 reports on mobility trends. Available at: https://            Chi Minh City, Vietnam: a clinical virological and epidemiological analysis. PLoS
    www.apple.com/covid19/mobility. Accessed 7 May 2020.                                    Med 2010; 7:e1000277-11.
14. Google LLC. Google COVID-19 community mobility reports. Available at:               29. Khanh TH, Sabanathan S, Thanh TT, et al. Enterovirus 71–associated Hand,
    https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/. Accessed 7 May 2020.                          foot, and mouth disease, Southern Vietnam, 2011. Emerg Infect Dis 2012;
15. Thompson RN, Stockwin JE, van Gaalen RD, et al. Improved inference of time-             18:2002–5.
    varying reproduction numbers during infectious disease outbreaks. Epidemics         30. Choisy M, Trinh ST, Nguyen TND, et al. Sero-prevalence surveillance to predict
    2019; 29:100356.                                                                        vaccine-preventable disease outbreaks: a lesson from the 2014 measles epidemic
16. Fox J, Weisberg S. An R. Companion to applied regression. 3rd ed. Thousand              in Northern Vietnam. Open Forum Infect Dis 2019; 6:103–7.
    Oaks CA: Sage, 2019. Available at: https://socialsciences.mcmaster.ca/jfox/         31. Hung TM, Clapham HE, Bettis AA, et al. The estimates of the health and eco-
    Books/Companion/.                                                                       nomic burden of dengue in Vietnam. Trends Parasitol 2018; 34:904–18.
17. R Core Team. R: a language and environment for statistical computing. Vienna,       32. Balajee SA, Pasi OG, Etoundi AGM, et al. Sustainable model for public health
    Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing, 2020. Available at: https://           emergency operations centers for global settings. Emerg Infect Dis 2017;
    www.R-project.org/.                                                                     23:93–6.




                                                                                            SARS-CoV-2 Control in Vietnam • cid 2020:XX (XX XXXX) • 9
