                                                   Order Code RL32072




                  CRS Report for Congress
                                      Received through the CRS Web




   Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS):
                   The International Response




                                                September 8, 2003



                                                 (name redacted)
                                             Foreign Affairs Analyst
                                                     Tiaji Salaam
                                           Foreign Affairs Analyst
                     Foreign Affairs, Defense, and Trade Division




Congressional Research Service ˜ The Library of Congress
       Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS):
               The International Response

Summary

      Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), a new highly infectious disease,
was first identified by the World Health Organization (WHO) in February 2003.
While the overall number of confirmed cases is not high by comparison with
statistics for other infectious diseases, the distance and speed with which SARS
spread raised an alarm over the potential risks to international public health.
Containment appears to be working; however, there are fears that another SARS
outbreak could take place during the regular influenza season later in 2003.

     The United States was instrumental in the global effort to contain the spread of
SARS. Affected countries responded in different ways. Singapore and Taiwan acted
quickly and encouraged international support in curbing the spread of the virus.
China, on the other hand, has been criticized for down-playing the magnitude of the
problem, particularly in the early phase of the disease. This, some analysts contend,
ultimately enabled the virus to cross borders and in the case of Canada, hemispheres.

      This report takes a retrospective look at the global response by WHO and by
those countries most affected. It reveals some of the challenges that may lie ahead
for the global health community, such as global interdependence and transparency,
surge capacity, management of public fear and information disclosure, coordination
of different national responses, and lack of funding. Examining the impacts of SARS
and lessons learned may be useful in the response to future outbreaks or incidences
of new diseases. This report will not be updated.
Contents

Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

International Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
     Overview of the Role of the World Health Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
     WHO’s Global Health Alert Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
          The Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) . . . . . . 3
          The Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN) . . . . . . . . . . 3
     The Global Threat of SARS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     WHO’s Response to SARS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     SARS and International Health Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
          Overview of the International Health Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
          The Fifty-Sixth World Health Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

Country Responses to SARS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
    China and Hong Kong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
    Taiwan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
    Vietnam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
    Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
    Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

Congressional Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
    Infectious Disease Monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
    Capacity Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
    Improving U.S. Response Capability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

Future Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     Global Interdependence and Transparency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     Developing Surge Capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     Public Fear and Information Disclosure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     National Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     Inadequate Funding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
       Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
       (SARS): The International Response

                                Background
     Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), a new, highly infectious viral
disease, was first identified by the World Health Organization (WHO) in February
2003. It is believed to have had its beginnings in China’s Guangdong Province in
November 2002. A respiratory disease that causes flu-like symptoms which may
progress to pneumonia, SARS has an average fatality rate of 15%. Between
November 2002 and July 2003, a total of 8,437 cases and 813 deaths were reported
in 31 countries.1

     While the overall numbers are not high by comparison with other serious
infectious diseases, the speed and distance with which SARS spread raised an alarm
over the potential risks to international public health. Containment appears to be
working; however, there are fears that another SARS outbreak might take place
during the regular influenza season later in 2003. This report reviews the global
response by WHO and those countries most affected. It also examines the challenges
that may lie ahead should another outbreak of SARS (or another unknown infectious
disease) occur.2


                       International Response
     Since late February, when WHO first identified the outbreak of what later
became known as the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), it has played a
key role in the global response to the disease. SARS is a striking example of the
risks to international public health posed by such infectious diseases. It also
highlights the need for appropriate mechanisms of containment, particularly as
global travel has become the primary means of spreading the disease around the
world.

     Following its initial assessment, WHO made containment of SARS its main
goal. “Despite the lack of understanding about the disease, its cause, and future


1
 For a full discussion of the medical background to SARS and the U.S. response see CRS
Report RL31937, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS): Public Health Situation and
U.S. Response.
2
 Other sources are examining the SARS outbreak, for example, J.M. Drazen, “SARS —
Looking Back over the First 100 Days,” The New England Journal of Medicine, July 24,
2003.
                                       CRS-2

evolution, the need was great to introduce a series of emergency measures to contain
SARS outbreaks in the affected areas and prevent further international spread, thus
reducing opportunities for the new disease to establish itself.”3 Although WHO’s
representative in China, Henk Bekedam, reportedly said on June 5, 2003 that the
outbreak of SARS had reached its peak worldwide,4 WHO continues to stress the
importance of sustaining international public health measures against SARS and
working towards eliminating it as a public health threat. The SARS outbreak may
reveal valuable lessons about the effectiveness of WHO’s surveillance and response
systems, and its capacity to respond to similar outbreaks in the future. Examining the
evolution of SARS also demonstrates the chains of transmission and role of the
WHO in responding to unfolding events.

      Although WHO led an unprecedented global collaborative effort to contain
SARS, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) also played a key
role in the global partnership. For more information on the role of the CDC in
relation to SARS, see CRS Report RL31937, SARS: Public Health Situation and U.S.
Response.

Overview of the Role of the World Health Organization
     The World Health Organization (WHO), established in 1948, is the U.N.
system’s authority on international public health issues. It assists governments in
improving national health services and in establishing worldwide standards for foods,
chemicals, and biological and pharmaceutical products. WHO concentrates on
preventive rather than curative programs, including efforts to eradicate endemic and
other widespread diseases, stabilize population growth, improve nutrition, sanitation,
and maternal and child care. WHO works through contracts with other agencies and
private voluntary organizations. The United States has been a member of WHO
since 1948.

     The WHO policy making body is the World Health Assembly, composed of all
192-member states. It meets annually in May to decide the overall direction of the
Organization and the general program for a specific period, and to adopt the two-year
budget. Decisions are made by majority vote, except for decisions on the budget that
require a two-thirds vote. There is no veto provision. The Assembly elects the
Director General as well as the 32 member states who designate persons to serve on
the Executive Board. The Executive Board meets twice a year to review the work of
WHO in more detail and prepares issues for consideration by the Assembly. Ten to
twelve members of the Board are replaced every year. The United States has been
a member on the Executive Board three out of every four years.




3
  WHO, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS): Status of the Outbreak and Lessons
for the Immediate Future. WHO: Geneva, May 20, 2003.
4
  United Nations Foundation, “SARS: WHO Declares Outbreak ‘Over its Peak.’” June 5,
2003. [http://www.unwire.org/UNWire/20030605/34097_story.asp]
                                         CRS-3

WHO’s Global Health Alert Systems
     The Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN). In
April 2000, WHO formally established the Global Outbreak Alert and Response
Network (GOARN) which brought together 112 institutions and networks of people
and technical resources to respond to disease outbreaks of international concern.
This global health security network provides not only an operational framework,
drawing on data, expertise, and skill, but also aims to standardize the international
response.5 It relies on its partners and agreed standards of practice in responding to
potential threats, which may include emerging diseases and the intentional use of
biological agents. In four years, between January 1998 and March 2002, GOARN
examined 538 such cases in 132 countries.6

      The Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN). WHO also
relies on the Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN), which is a
customized search engine that tracks Internet communications. This system proved
to be very useful in picking up telecommunicated alerts in China. The system is also
useful to WHO in clarifying or refuting information that may create disruption or
panic. Other tools include geographical mapping technology and an event
management and tracking system that provides an overview of operations.

The Global Threat of SARS
     It was clear that SARS presented a serious global threat. Lack of information
about the cause and evolution of the new disease made its potential impact unknown.
WHO concluded that the virus comes from a strain likely to include frequent
mutations and links to animal species, with implications for the likelihood of
establishing endemicity and underlining the importance of finding the means to
control or contain it. Several factors were deemed critical in this analysis:

     !   The symptoms are non-specific and common;
     !   The symptoms can be severe and some patients require intensive
         care for respiratory failure;
     !   The disease spreads easily from one location to another via air travel
         as demonstrated in transmission patterns from the initial outbreak in
         Asia to other regions, such as North America and Europe;
     !   There is no vaccine or treatment yet available and diagnostics tests
         are of limited use. A number of antivirals are not effective;
     !   The causative agent is not well understood, so the potential for
         continued spread remains;
     !   Certain cases may contribute to the rapid spread of infection;
     !   Hospital staff, who are a vital link to the control of infection, are
         disproportionately affected as are other close contacts of the patients;


5
  For more information on the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network, see:
[http://www.who.int/csr/outbreaknetwork].
6
  WHO, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS): Status of the Outbreak and Lessons
for the Immediate Future. WHO: Geneva, May 20, 2003, p. 4.
                                           CRS-4

        !   The disease requires intensive treatment in isolation and is a burden
            on health care systems.7

      By comparison to SARS, except in the case of HIV/AIDS, other new diseases
that have emerged in the last few decades have not presented the same combination
of factors that pose such a heavy global risk to international health. Some of these
diseases have not sustained strong human-to-human transmission, others have relied
on food or a vector (such as mosquitos) for transmission, and still others have had an
identifiable, often containable, geographic location.

WHO’s Response to SARS
     Once the severity of the disease was recognized, in February and March 2003,
WHO took aggressive action. Examining the factors outlined above and the
chronology of events unfolding in China, Hong Kong, Vietnam, and Toronto, it
identified international travel as a primary means of spreading the virus. It also
concluded at the time that some people might be highly infectious, or “super
spreaders”. Identifying these individuals could be critical to the control of the
disease.8 On March 15, 2003, WHO issued emergency travel recommendations as
a global alert and response to international travelers, health care professionals, and
border authorities. Later in March it recommended screening passengers at airports
coming from areas with recent local transmission and gave advice to airlines on
appropriate procedures if a case was suspected during flight. In April and May, on
several occasions, the WHO issued its most stringent travel advisories recommending
the postponement of all but essential travel to areas considered high risk for SARS,.9

      WHO also quickly moved to set up systems for — and increase awareness of
the need for — immediate isolation and quarantine of those with or suspected of
having SARS. In addition, it began the detailed work of contact tracing to find the
source of the spread. These procedures along with simple diagnostics and screening
all contributed to the ongoing containment effort.

     The response to SARS placed heavy demands on WHO and its GOARN
partners. Time was very much of the essence. WHO pulled together a
comprehensive network, including mobilizing a response on the ground, providing
resources and supplies, monitoring and reporting, and establishing scientific and
medical collaboration. The WHO issued travel procedures to prevent and manage
probable cases of SARS.10 It established a collaborative multi-center research project



7
 The eight bullet points are drawn from a discussion in Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
(SARS): Status of the Outbreak and Lessons for the Immediate Future. WHO: Geneva, May
20, 2003, p. 2-3.
8
 TB and Outbreaks Weekly, “Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome; WHO points at ‘super
spreaders’ as key to stopping SARS,” April 29, 2003.
9
  WHO, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS): Status of the Outbreak and Lessons
for the Immediate Future. Geneva: WHO, May 20, 2003, p. 6.
10
     For more detail, see [www.who.int/csr/sars/travel].
                                         CRS-5

on SARS and brought together clinicians for SARS diagnosis and treatment.11 It also
developed guidelines, recommendations, and descriptions concerning case
definitions, case management, laboratories, biosafety, blood safety, epidemiology,
mass gatherings, and goods and animals from SARS-affected areas.12

     An urgent plan for the operational response to SARS was developed and
implemented. This included providing expertise and supplies in SARS-affected areas
and hospitals, and “in the air” through technology to bring the best minds to the
collaboration required. This plan resulted in:

       !   A global alert
       !   Rapid case identification
       !   Global reporting system and verification
       !   Regular updates and advice
       !   International field support and logistics coordination
       !   Epidemiological and clinical networking
       !   Laboratory network13

      Through this network, and daily conference calls, epidemiologists were able to
discuss cases, refine their definitions, examine chains of transmission, track progress,
and increase their understanding of what worked best where. Similarly, individuals
working in the clinical network were able to share experiences with different forms
of treatment, examine the possible reasons for the range of individual responses to
the disease, and develop guidelines for infection control. The network of the
laboratories enabled many scientists to work together to come up with the
identification of the SARS virus.

      Scientists have much to learn about SARS, including understanding the
evolution of the disease, designing early detection, prevention and treatment
strategies, and establishing effective surveillance systems. Until then, containment
may remain the most effective control tool. If SARS becomes endemic, the WHO
may find the application of models of response for other infectious diseases, such as
malaria, meningitis and yellow fever useful in combating the disease and developing
therapies and vaccines.14

    WHO has issued an appeal for funding to support its surveillance and
monitoring activities in Asia. It hopes to help those hardest hit by the disease
economically, to continue with their efforts to control SARS, and ultimately to




11
  For more information about the WHO collaborative network, see [http://www.who.int/
csr/sars/networkshome].
12
     Links to information under              these   headings       can   be   found   at
[http://www.who.int/csr/sars/guidelines].
13
     WHO, “The Operational Response,” April 16, 2003.
14
  WHO, “Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS): Status of the Outbreak and Lessons
for the Immediate Future,” Geneva, Switzerland, May 20, 2003, p. 7.
                                        CRS-6

eliminate the disease as a global threat.15 The WHO has an annual budget of nearly
$850 million. It relies heavily on its 192 member states for resources and teams of
experts.16

SARS and International Health Regulations
      The outbreak of SARS has raised many public health questions, including the
application of international law. According to David P. Fidler, Professor of Law at
Indiana School of Law in Bloomington, the legal implications affect three main areas
 — International Health Regulations (IHR); public health measures and civil and
political rights; and principles of state responsibility in responding to SARS.17 This
section will focus on the IHR because of its relevance to WHO.

      Overview of the International Health Regulations. In 1951, under
Article 21 of the WHO constitution, member states adopted the International Sanitary
Regulations, which in 1969 became known as the International Health Regulations
(IHR). Amendments were made in 1973 and 1981. The main purpose was to control
the spread of diseases with minimum impact on world traffic through the
development of a global surveillance system, the use of procedures at ports and
airports, and the creation of disease-specific provisions. Some argue that the
regulations have not been effective in ensuring protection against diseases in a world
of increasing trade and travel. Experts maintain that a key reason for ineffectiveness
lies in the limited number of diseases to which the IHR applies. Originally, the
regulation covered six diseases — smallpox, relapsing fever, typhus, cholera, plague,
and yellow fever.18 Today the IHR applies only to the last three diseases. Smallpox
is considered to have been eradicated some years ago. Relapsing fever and typhus had
been so successfully controlled that they were no longer considered a public health
threat. The IHR do not apply to more recent infectious diseases such as HIV/AIDS
and SARS. Member states were therefore under no obligation to report the outbreak
of a new infectious disease nor were they required to restrict trade or travel even if
it would benefit containment.19

    In the 1990s, the WHO initiated a revision of the IHR to address the limited
scope of the diseases covered, increase its relevance to the kinds of infectious disease




15
     The Australian, “WHO Seeks $306m for SARS Fight,” May 23, 2003.
16
  Washington Post, “SARS Shows WHO Disease Hunters’ Skills, and Limits,” May 31,
2003. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
17
  The American Society of International Law, SARS and International Law, April 2003, see
[http://www.asil.org/insights].
18
  WHO, “International Health Regulations.” [www.who.int/csr/ihr/en.]; The American
Society of International Law, SARS and International Law, April 2003.
19
  The American Society of International Law, SARS and International Law, April 2003,
see [http://www.asil.org/insights].
                                           CRS-7

threats most prevalent or likely today, and to manage the return of old diseases. These
revisions are scheduled to be finalized in 2005.20

     In 2001, the World Health Assembly adopted a resolution concerning member
response to international public health emergencies and global health security with
reference to epidemics. In 2002, another resolution made the response more specific,
and included health risks related not only to natural occurrence, but to accidental or
deliberate use of biological and chemical agents.21

     The SARS outbreak added momentum to discussions about revising the IHL
that were already well under way. As recently as January 2003, the 192 member
states had been discussing the details of the new framework, with a resolution for
completing the revised regulations. Although the IHR were recognized as being
outdated, the case of SARS highlighted the problems of transparency — China
denied the problem existed for months, and the information provided from Toronto
was criticized by some as incomplete and not timely enough.

     The Fifty-Sixth World Health Assembly. Fidler argues that “the SARS
epidemic may encourage WHO member states to accept a more robust international
legal framework for global infectious disease control than has existed historically.”22
At the Fifty-Sixth World Health Assembly in May 2003, the member states adopted
two resolutions relevant to the SARS outbreak, one specifically on SARS, the other
on the revision of IHL.23 The SARS resolution focuses on eleven recommendations
to WHO member states in addressing the SARS outbreak; it also requests the WHO
Director General to take specific actions. None of these are new obligations or
binding on member states as earlier press reports might have suggested. Rather, they
build on the role of the WHO and highlight the need for information sharing and
international cooperation in combating an outbreak such as SARS.24


20
  WHO Executive Board, Revision of the International Health Regulations, EB111.R13,
Agenda Item 5.12, 111th Session, January 24, 2003. Report by the Secretariat, WHO
Executive Board,”Revision of the International Health Regulations,” EB111/4, Provisional
Agenda item 5.12, 111th Session, December 15, 2002.
21
    WHO, Revision Process of the International Health Regulations (IHR).
[http://www.who.int/csr/ihr/revision/en/]. Previous resolutions include: WHA48.13 on new,
emerging, and re-emerging infectious diseases, WHA54.14 on global health security,
epidemic alert and response,EB111.R13 on revision of IHR, and EB111.R6 on the
prevention and control of influenza pandemics and annual epidemics. See Fifty-Sixth World
Health Assembly, Geneva, 19-28 May 2003, A56/48 - Revision of the International Health
Regulations.
22
     The American Society of International Law, SARS and International Law, April 2003.
23
  World Health Assembly, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), WHA56.29, May
28, 2003; and World Health Assembly, Revision of the International Health Regulations,
WHA56-28, May 28, 2003. For a discussion of these resolutions in international law, see
The American Society of International Law, Developments Involving SARS, International
Law, and Infectious Disease Control at the Fifty-Sixth Meeting of the World Health
Assembly, June 2003. See [http://www.asil.org/insights].
24
     The American Society of International Law, Developments Involving SARS, International
                                                                             (continued...)
                                        CRS-8

     The IHL Resolution takes an important political step in emphasizing the need
for member states to cooperate with other states and the WHO in monitoring and
responding to infectious diseases. Although the SARS outbreak highlighted the
strong need for revision of the IHL, then WHO Director General Gro Harlem
Brundtland also pointed out the difficult balance to be struck in revising the
regulations, such as state obligations to report sensitive health information, protection
of human rights and civil liberties in light of an international health threat, and the
impact on immigration policies and decisions.25 The IHL Resolution does not give
WHO a significant increase in authority in terms of intervention during a potential
public health threat, nor does it give WHO the power to reprimand a state that does
not comply.26 However, the IHL Resolution lays the political groundwork for states
to respond appropriately, much of the encouragement to comply will likely come
from international pressure as the SARS case demonstrated.27

      The IHL resolution was adopted as an interim measure until the IHL revisions
are finalized in 2005. The WHO opted for this two-step process rather than insisting
that members immediately approve the incorporation of the resolution into the IHL.28
Some experts suggest that this resolution will encourage WHO collaboration within
countries and also provide momentum for implementation of the measures outlined
in the resolution.29 The U.S. delegation initially asked for a postponement of action
on the proposed resolution, hoping to include it in a broader discussion, but later
conceded when it did not enlist member support.30 Others suggested that this was a
“negotiating tactic” used to avoid too early a commitment by the United States.31




24
  (...continued)
Law, and Infectious Disease Control at the Fifty-Sixth Meeting of the World Health
Assembly, June 2003. See [http://www.asil.org/insights].
25
 Washington Fax, Brundtland Urges Health Security Measures for WHO Member States,
May 21, 2003.
26
 The American Society of International Law, Developments Involving SARS, International
Law, and Infectious Disease Control at the Fifty-Sixth Meeting of the World Health
Assembly, June 2003. See [http://www.asil.org/insights].
27
  Washington Post, “WHO Gets Wider Power to Fight Global Health Threats,” May 28,
2003. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
28
  Washington Post, “WHO Gets Wider Power to Fight Global Health Threats,” May 28,
2003. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
29
     ProMed,”Comment on WHA Resolution,” May 28, 2003.
30
  Washington Post, “WHO Gets Wider Power to Fight Global Health Threats,” May 28,
2003. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
31
  United Nations Foundation, “WHO: Members Vote to Give Agency New Powers in
Outbreaks, More”UN Wire, May 28, 2003. See
[http://www.unwire.org/UNWire/20030528/33949_story.asp]
                                      CRS-9

                   Country Responses to SARS
     The SARS virus rapidly spread to 30 countries, ultimately infecting 8,437
people, of whom 813 died.32 Each country handled the virus differently. Some
countries, like Vietnam, immediately called for international support. Others, like
China, initially downplayed the severity of the virus within their borders. Although
the United States reported 75 SARS cases it had no SARS-related deaths.33
Countries experiencing five or more SARS deaths are discussed in this section.
Other countries that reported SARS deaths include: France (1), Malaysia (2),
Philippines (2), South Africa (1), and Thailand (2).

China and Hong Kong
     Reports of SARS outbreak coverups surfaced in mainland China in April 2003.
Many blamed China for the global SARS crisis, which seems to have started in
southern China. Critics argued that had China been forthright in proclaiming the
extent of the SARS problem, the disease would not have spread throughout the
country, and eventually to other countries.34

     In response to international criticism about its complacency and cover-up in
preventing the spread of the virus, the Chinese government took a number of steps
to demonstrate transparency and vigilance in combating the spread of SARS. The
Mayor of Beijing and the Minister of Health were fired.35 Chinese authorities also
quarantined those with symptoms of the disease and those with whom they had
contact, often thousands at a time.36 Entire apartment buildings, markets, hospitals,
universities, and schools were shut down. All schools in Beijing were closed for
nearly three months.37 Chinese authorities banned all tourist visits from the central
part of the country and Tibet.38 China also closed some border crossings, including




32
  WHO, Cumulative Number of Reported Probable Cases of SARS. July 10, 2003.
[http://www.who.int/csr/sars/country/2003_07_11/en/]
33
  For more information on how the United States combated the spread of SARS see CRS
Report RL31937, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS): Public Health Situation and
U.S. Response.
34
 Pomfret, John, “Beijing Told Doctors to Hide SARS Victims.” April 20, 2003. The
Washington Post. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
35
  Pomfret, John, “Thousands Flee Beijing, Fearing SARS.”       April 24, 2003. The
Washington Post. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
36
  Eckholm, Erik, “4,000 Quarantined in Beijing as Suspected SARS Cases Climb.” April
25, 2003. The New York Times. [http://www.nytimes.com]
37
   The New York Times, “As SARS Eases, Beijing Classes Resume.” May 19, 2003.
[http://www.nytimes.com]
38
    Maynard, Micheline, “Passport, Mask, Thermometer.”             May 11, 2003.
[http://www.nytimes.com]
                                         CRS-10

some between China and Mongolia and postponed reopening the Khunjirap crossing
between China and Pakistan.39

     Chinese officials enacted new laws to fight SARS. One of China’s most
controversial laws, calls for the imprisonment or execution of anyone found
intentionally spreading the virus. The first person facing punishment under this law
is Dr. Li Song. Authorities charge Dr. Li with vandalism and violating an infectious
disease law.40 Hospital officials argue that he left a hospital knowing he had SARS,
and ultimately spread the virus to his family and more than 100 others in the small
town of Linhe. Dr. Li’s mother, father and wife have died of SARS, while Dr. Li
remains in jail.41

      Other laws sought to halt the spread of the virus through fines. Authorities in
the southern town of Guangzhou began fining individuals who spit in public 50 yuan
(about $6 US), a fine that many will find difficult to pay.42 In Shanghai, those found
spitting, as well as throwing away cigarette stubs or fruit peels in public areas, and
dumping garbage and sewage in the wrong places are subject to a fine of 200 yuan
(about $24 US), compared to 50 yuan prior to the SARS outbreak.43

      China’s moves to address the spread of SARS have also included financial
assistance. The Chinese Ministry of Finance allocated a total of 440 million yuan
(about $53 million) to reinforce the fight against SARS.44 Provincial and local
governments also offered assistance to those affected by SARS. Assistance included
the distribution of temporary subsidies, disinfectants, protective surgical masks and
soap. One Beijing district, the Dongcheng District, reported that it decided to
provide 420 thousand yuan (about $51 thousand) to its low income residents, and
Chaoyang District allocated 350 thousand yuan (about $42 thousand) towards the
purchase of preventive aids.45 Meanwhile officials in Hong Kong announced a $1.5
billion aid package, which included waiving water and sewage charges for the

39
  China Internet Information Center, “China Temporarily Closes Some Border Ports.” May
12, 2003. [http://www.china.org.cn/english/index.htm]
40
 Kahn, Joseph, “Man’s Virus Infects Town, Killing His Family.” May 15, 2003. The New
York Times. [http://www.nytimes.com]
41
  Supporters of Dr. Li point out a number of inconsistencies in the charges. Although
Chinese officials claim Dr. Li spread the virus throughout Linhe when he walked out of Ba
Meng Hospital on April 8, 2003, SARS was not placed on the mandatory quarantine list
until April 14, six days later. Furthermore, members of Dr. Li’s family contend that he did
not know that he was infected with SARS, and he only left the hospital after complaining
of poor treatment. Dr. Li also reportedly walked out of the facility to care for his parents
who suddenly became ill. The Li family are currently searching for a lawyer.
42
     BBC News, “Spitting ban to combat SARS.” May 14, 2003. [www.bbc.co.uk]
43
  People’s Daily, “SARS Epidemic Increases Personal Hygiene Awareness.” April 28,
2003. [http://english.peopledaily.com.cn/]
44
  People’s Daily, “China Allocates US $6.25 mln on Anti-SARS Measures.” May 23, 2003.
[http://english.peopledaily.com.com.cn/]
45
  People’s Daily, “Beijing Moves to Aid Economically disadvantaged residents in SARS
fight.” April 24, 2003. [http://english.peopledaily.com.cn/]
                                       CRS-11

general public for up to four months, increasing income tax rebates, waiving license
fees for heavily affected industries, guaranteeing $450 million in loans to affected
businesses, increasing medical research spending, and reducing commercial rents for
stores at public housing sites and other government controlled properties.46 The
Chinese Government also reserved $128 million for a Hong Kong marketing
campaign now that the city has been removed from the WHO list of infected areas.47
According to the Chinese Government, the international community donated about
$76.6 million to aid its fight against SARS.48

     On June 10, the WHO sent a high-level team, including Dr. David Heymann,
Executive Director for Communicable Diseases at WHO, to China to assess the
current situation and plan a strategy for the future. They proposed steps for
examining and detecting cases, defining procedures for contact tracing, and
responding to local transmissions. WHO was particularly concerned about the
capacity of the Chinese rural health systems to deal with emerging infectious
diseases, from effective monitoring and reporting to adequate hospital care.49
However, it found that surveillance systems in two key rural provinces were
effective.50 China has also surprised many with the speed with which it brought its
outbreak under control. Some studies suggest that the mortality rate may have been
lower, and the cure rate higher, than in other parts of the world. Differences in
incubation period and groups at highest risk may provide clues for fighting the
disease. According to Dr. Heymann, “Long-term containment depends on finding
answers to a long list of scientific questions. China has much to offer the rest of the
world.”51

     On June 24, 2003, WHO removed its recommendation that people should
postpone all but essential travel to Beijing, China. Beijing was the last area in the
world to have the travel warning lifted. Beijing, with a cumulative total of 2,521
probable cases and 191 deaths, has had the largest outbreak of SARS anywhere in the
world, followed by Hong Kong with 1,755 cases and 296 deaths, and Guangdong
Province with 1,511 cases and 57 deaths.52




46
 Bradsher, Keith, “Epidemic Spurs Plan to Revive Hong Kong.” April 24, 2003. The New
York Times. [http://www.nytimes.com]
47
  Bradsher, Keith, “Relieved Hong Kong Starts to Shed Masks.” May 25, 2003. The New
York Times. [http://www.nytimes.com]
48
 People’s Daily, “FM Spokeswoman Briefs on Assistance to China for SARS Battle.”
May 9, 2003. [http://english.peopledaily.com.cn/]
49
     WHO, “Update 77 — WHO Officials to Visit China,” June 10, 2003.
50
   WHO, “Update 59 - Report on Guangxi (China) visit, situation in Taiwan, risk of SARS
transmission during air travel.” May 19, 2003. [httpwww.who.int/csr/sars]
51
     WHO, “Update 77 — WHO Officials to Visit China,” June 10, 2003.
52
   WHO, “Update 87 - World Health Organization changes last remaining travel
recommendation — for Beijing, China.” June 24, 2003. [http://www.who.int]
                                         CRS-12

Taiwan
     The doubling of SARS deaths53 in Taiwan prompted WHO to send a team to
investigate the island’s SARS situation. The sharp increase in new cases and deaths
surprised some as Taiwan initially appeared successful in curtailing mortality,
avoiding international community transmission, as well as maintaining a relatively
low number of new cases compared to mainland China. The government of Taiwan
took early steps to avoid a massive SARS outbreak, including imposing mandatory
10-day quarantines on all visitors arriving from China, Hong Kong, Singapore or
Toronto; cancelling more than 100 commercial flights; cancelling high school exams
scheduled for the end of May; and monitoring the temperature of visitors to many
public buildings and hotels.54

     In May 2003, the President of Taiwan, who has been vocal in his desire to gain
Taiwanese observer status to the WHO55, stated that Taiwanese hospital officials
from Taipei Municipal Hoping Hospital may have tried to cover up a SARS
outbreak.56 In response, Taiwanese authorities fired the superintendent of the
hospital and relocated all 200 patients and 900 employees from Hoping Hospital to
a designated SARS facility while the hospital was being disinfected.57 Shortly after,
the Taipei City Government fined the Hoping Hospital 1.1 million Taiwan dollars
($31,682 US) and four other hospitals 1.5 million Taiwan dollars ($43,202 US) each
for delaying reporting SARS cases to health authorities, and revoked the licence of
the former Jen Chi Hospital superintendent, Liao Cheng-hsiung, accusing him of
covering up a SARS outbreak while serving.58 The Taiwan Minister of Health, Dr.
Twu Shiing-jer, voluntarily resigned on May 16, 2003, taking full responsibility for
the SARS spread.59 Two days later, more than 140 medical employees across the
island reportedly resigned to avoid dealing with SARS patients.60 The medical
workers charged that the government had failed to provide sufficient protective
gear.61



53
  WHO reported 10 SARS deaths in Taiwan on May 6, 2003, and 24 SARS deaths on May
13, 2003.
54
 Luh, Shu Shin and John Pomfret, “Taiwan Bidding to Join WHO.” May 10, 2003. The
Washington Post. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
55
     Taiwan is not a WHO member, thus it sought China’s consent before sending a team.
56
  Luh, Shu Shin and John Pomfret, “Taiwanese President Suggests Hospital Covered Up
Disease.” May 13, 2003. The Washington Post. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
57
     Ibid.
58
  Channel News Asia, “Taiwan officials confident of bringing SARS under control despite
55 new cases Friday.” May 23, 2003. [http://www.channelnewsasia.com]
59
 McNeil Jr., Donald G., “Taiwan Health Minister Quits Over His Handling of SARS.”
May 16, 2003. The New York Times. [http://www.nytimes.com]
60
 Culpan, Tim, “Taiwan Posts Daily Record for SARS Cases.” May 21, 2003. The
Washington Post. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
61
  Connolly, Ceci and Tim Culpan, “U.S. Doctor with SARS Symptoms to Return
Home.” May 23, 2003. The Washington Post. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
                                        CRS-13

      WHO officials believe that lapses in infection control, particularly in emergency
rooms, may have been one of the reasons for the rapid increase in cases.62 Reports
seem to support the assertion that Taiwanese health officials may not have taken
enough measures to limit the spread of the virus both within and among the hospitals.
The Dean of Hoping Municipal Hospital’s Radiology Department reported that,
“Everything went wrong. There is no proper quarantine facility.” It was reported
that hospital staff did not separate SARS patients from non-SARS patients, and did
not ask patients about their medical history. Concern about Taiwan’s ability to
contain the virus was heightened when CDC officials announced on May 23, 2003
that an American doctor sent with the WHO/CDC team to investigate Taiwan’s
recent upsurge in SARS cases was suspected to have become infected with SARS
and was returned to the U.S. to undergo treatment.63 CDC officials added that
Hoping Hospital made the critical mistake of sending SARS patients to other
hospitals for treatment, unwittingly spreading the disease.64

      In addition to its collaborative efforts with CDC and WHO, Taiwan bolstered
its quarantine efforts, strengthened its contact tracing capabilities, and improved its
infection control practices. The Government of Taiwan also released a $1.44 billion
U.S. aid package, which sought to assist ailing businesses and families of SARS
victims, establish SARS prevention mechanisms, and create effective SARS contact
tracing mechanisms.65 Taiwan was removed from the WHO list of areas with recent
local transmission on July 5, 2003. Its last probable case was reported on June 19,
2003. To date, 671 people have contracted the virus, of whom 84 have died.

Vietnam
     Vietnam, the poorest of the SARS-affected countries, was the first country to
contain the SARS virus. The WHO removed Vietnam from its list of affected
countries less than five weeks after it recorded its first SARS death.66 Vietnam was
hailed as a success story largely because of its rapid response to the health crisis, and
its cooperation with WHO and CDC officials who offered critical technical
assistance.67 According to the WHO, Vietnam was fortunate to have had only one
carrier, who spent less than three days among the general public prior to
hospitalization. This limited the number of contacts that the man made.


62
  WHO, “Update 59 - Report on Guangxi (China) visit, situation in Taiwan, risk of SARS
transmission during air travel.” May 19, 2003. [http://www.who.int]
63
 Altman, Lawrence and Donald G. McNeil, “U.S. Doctor with Symptoms to Fly Home from
Taiwan.” May 23, 2003. The Washington Post. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
64
  Chung, Lawrence, “Complacency and infighting led to worsening outbreak.” May 23,
2003. The Straits Times website. [http://www.straitstimes.com]
65
  Channel News Asia, “Taiwan’s parliament approves special budget of US $1.44 billion
to combat SARS.” May 23, 2003. [http://www.channelnewsasia.com]
66
 Nakashima, Ellen, “Vietnam Took Lead in Containing SARS.” May 5, 2003. The
Washington Post. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
67
 WHO, “Update 39 - Optimism in Viet Nam, caution urged when using diagnostic tests.”
April 25, 2003. [http://www.who.int/csr/sars]
                                        CRS-14

      Some observers praised the success of the country with less resources than its
SARS-affected neighbors to rapidly contain the virus. One Vietnamese health
official explained that Vietnam’s response contrasted with China’s initial response
in that Vietnam did not seek to downplay the potential impact of the disease and it
welcomed international assistance. France quickly announced that it would offer
more than $100,000 to help sterilize Hanoi French Hospital, where the first SARS
case was detected.68 The WHO and CDC donated masks, gowns and other
equipment; Japan contributed two ventilators and other medical supplies; Doctors
Without Borders sent a medical team; and Vietnamese medical workers were trained
in infection control techniques.69 Vietnamese doctors also voluntarily quarantined
themselves in Bach Mai hospital, the designated SARS hospital, to avoid spreading
the virus to their families and the general community.

      The government of Vietnam ordered the establishment of provincial and
municipal steering committees responsible for closing down any entity and isolating
any individual who contracted SARS or was suspected to be infected with the virus.70
It also trained medical workers, customs officers, airline staff and those working in
the tourism sectors.71 The Finance Ministry spent about $2 million on medical
equipment and activities related to SARS prevention72 and targeted a little more than
$1 million for Vietnam’s border provinces tasked with preventing SARS from
leaving or entering Vietnam.73 The Government of Vietnam recently announced that
it intended to spend an additional $3.3 million to prevent SARS from returning.74
Johnny Chen, believed to have carried SARS to Vietnam from China, died of SARS
on March 13, 2003. A little more than a month later on April 28, 2003, the WHO
announced that Vietnam was the first country to have contained the deadly virus. A
total of 63 people contracted SARS in Vietnam, 5 of whom died.75




68
    Asia Times, “Vietnam shows how to beat SARS.”                    April 30, 2003.
[http://www.atimes.com]
69
 Nakashima, Ellen, “Vietnam Took Lead in Containing SARS.” May 5, 2003. The
Washington Post. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
70
  Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “Further precautions taken to ward off SARS.” March 31,
2003. [http://www.mofa.gov.vn]
71
  Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “Deputy Prime Minister asks all provinces to establish SARS
control committees.” April 16, 2003. [http://www.mofa.gov.vn]
72
  Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “30 billion VND for SARS prevention work.” April 8, 2003.
[http://www.mofa.gov.vn]
73
  Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “Further precautions taken to ward off SARS.” March 31,
2003. [http://www.mofa.gov.vn]
74
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “Ninety returnees from Beijing to leave isolated centre.”
May 12, 2003. [http://www.mofa.gov.vn]
                                       CRS-15

Singapore
     Some civil libertarians criticized the Government of Singapore in its response
to the SARS virus as being too harsh. However, the World Health Organization
commended Singapore on its response to the virus. Dr. David Heymann, Executive
Director of communicable disease programs at the WHO described Singapore’s
actions as “exemplary”, and stated that “Singapore has been one of the most
successful countries in its response to SARS.”76 The World Health Organization
removed Singapore from the list of areas with local SARS transmission on May 30,
2003.77

     Singapore’s actions against SARS were viewed as swift and widespread. For
example, the Ministry of Education required all schools to provide students with a
personal thermometer, and to teach them to check their own temperatures daily. All
students taking the national language exams in June 2003, underwent temperature
checks before entering testing sites. The Ministry also required the Institutes of
Higher Learning to segment their large campuses into smaller sections to reduce
movement across the campus and to facilitate contact tracing. Singapore required all
students and households to have thermometers by June 2003. Other steps taken to
prevent the spread of SARS included: directing all SARS cases to one hospital,
installing video cameras in the homes of all quarantined individuals, electronically
tagging violators of quarantine orders, using body thermal scanners at airports,
enforcing mandatory temperature checks for all individuals departing Singapore and
those arriving from SARS affected areas, requiring all food handlers to take their
temperatures twice a day, and applying mandatory temperature checks for entry to
many public events. On March 24, 2003, the Singapore Ministry of Health invoked
the Infectious Disease Act to isolate those infected with SARS, and prevent the
further spread of the virus. The act was amended on May 23, 2003, by requiring all
those who broke the home quarantine to be tagged, arrested, detained, and/or fined.
The first offense is punishable by up to $10,000 or 6 months imprisonment and
repeat offenders can be fined up to $20,000 or 12 months.78




76
  WHO, “Update 53 - Situation in Singapore and Hong Kong, interpretation of areas with
recent local transmission.” May 12, 2003. [http://www.who.int]
77
 WHO, “Update 70 - Singapore removed from list of areas with local SARS transmission.”
May 30, 2003. [http://www.who.int]
78
   Singapore Ministry of Information ,”Ministerial Statement in Parliament, SARS - A
National Response.” April 24, 2003. [http://app.sprinter.gov.sg/data/pr/2003042408.htm];
Ramesh, S, “Singapore toughens Infectious Disease Act to deal with SARS outbreak.” April
25, 2003. Channel News Asia. [http://www.channelnewsasia.com]; Government of
S i n g a p o r e , “ H o m e Q u a r a n t i n e In f o r m a t i o n . ” May 27, 2003.
[http://www.sars.gov.sg/family.html]; and Singapore Ministry of Education, “Arrangements
for the 2003 GCE ‘O’ & ‘A’ Level Mother Tongue Language Mid-Year Examinations.”
May 27, 2003. Government of Singapore. [www.sars.gov.sg]
                                       CRS-16

    The Government of Singapore also unveiled a $230 million SARS relief
package on April 17, 2003. Key elements include:

     !   a Home Quarantine Allowance Scheme, which pays an allowance
         to the self-employed and to small business owners who have
         employees affected by home quarantine orders;79
     !   property tax rebates for commercial properties and tourist hotels;
     !   50% reduction in foreign worker levy for unskilled workers
         employed by tourist hotels;
     !   a Bridging Loan Program, which offers working capital loans to
         tourism-related small- and medium-sized enterprises;
     !   a Skills Redevelopment Program and SARS Relief Tourism
         Training Assistance Program, which offers funds to employers who
         send their employees to certified training courses in the tourism
         sector;
     !   diesel and road tax rebates for taxis, and operator licence fee
         waivers;
     !   rebates on aircraft landing fees and rental spaces at airports;
     !   50% reduction in port dues for cruise ships; and
     !   dollar-for-dollar matching of funds for the Courage Fund, a tripartite
         fund established to help the victims of SARS and affected health
         care workers. The fund received nearly $10 million in just 7 weeks.80

     Singapore was removed from the list of areas with recent local transmission on
May 31, 2003. To date, 206 people have contracted SARS in Singapore, and 32 have
died of the virus. The last probable case was reported on May 18, 2003.

Canada
     When SARS first emerged in the country some criticized Canadian officials for
waiting too long to quarantine 500 members of a prayer group widely believed to
have been the source of the virus in Canada.81 WHO officials also complained that
the Canadian government had been slow to relay current information. Relations
between the U.N. agency and Canadian authorities were strained when the WHO
decided to place a SARS travel advisory on Toronto. Canada appealed to the WHO
to remove the travel advisory, because officials claimed they could trace all
occurrences of the virus.82 On May 14, 2003, two days after the 24th SARS victim
died, the WHO removed the travel advisory, citing 20 days had passed without new


79
  Singapore Ministry of Information ,”Ministerial Statement in Parliament, SARS - A
National Response.” April 24, 2003. [http://app.sprinter.gov.sg/data/pr/2003042408.htm]
80
  Ministry of Manpower, “Joint Media Release from the Ministry of Finance and Ministry
of Trade & Industry: Government Unveils $230 million SARS Relief Package.” April 24,
2003. [http://www.mom.gov.sg]
81
  Krauss, Clifford, “Disease Has Canada Doubting Its Leaders,” New York Times, April 19,
2003.
82
  Brown, DeNeen L., “Virus Worry Fades in Toronto, but Concerns Lingers.” April 24,
2003. The Washington Post. [http://www.washingtonpost.com]
                                        CRS-17

cases. However, on May 23, 2003 Toronto health officials reported that four new
suspected SARS cases were under close surveillance.83 On May 26, 2003, the WHO
placed Toronto back on its list of countries with recent local transmission, but it did
not place a travel advisory on the city.

      Following criticism of bureaucratic delay, Canadian officials took a number of
steps to contain the virus, including inviting the U.S. Centers for Disease Control
(CDC) to monitor its hospitals, closing a number of hospitals and clinics, and
quarantining those individuals suspected to have SARS. Canada also undertook a
number of initiatives to aid businesses and individuals adversely affected by SARS.
 On April 30, 2003, the Government of Canada passed the SARS Assistance and
Recovery Strategy Act, which protects the jobs of people affected by SARS, and
enables employees to take unpaid leave of absence for SARS-related reasons. It also
included $1.7 million in new funding to help scientists develop a new test and
possible vaccine for SARS. All tourist facilities in Toronto were also exempt from
retail tax from May 1, 2003 to September 30, 2003, under the act.84

     Another government initiative implemented to assist Canadians affected by
SARS is the SARS Grant Initiative. Eligible full-time and part-time health care
workers affected by SARS can receive $400 per week and $200 per week,
respectively. This initiative complements adjustments made to the Employment
Insurance (EI) Act, which allows up to 15 weeks of special benefits when an eligible
claimant is unable to work because of illness, injury or quarantine. The Government
of Canada has adjusted the EI program so that those who become ill due to SARS are
not immediately required to provide a medical certificate, and no longer have to wait
two weeks to receive benefits.85 Other SARS-related actions include:

     !   committing $10 million toward a marketing campaign;
     !   arranging special payment schedules or temporary deferral of
         mortgage payment for those who find it difficult to pay mortgages
         due to SARS;
     !   extending tax due dates, establishing flexible payment schedules and
         waiving tax penalties or interest for those affected by SARS; and
     !   offering a four-month postponement of capital payments without
         penalty and small capital loans to small businesses affected by
         SARS.86



83
  The Straits Times, “Officials fear four in Toronto hospital may have SARS.” May 23,
2003. [http://straitstimes.com]
84
  Premier Erne Eves Media Office, “Premier Ernie Eves’ SARS strategy bill passes on first
day of legislature.” May 13, 2003, Canada NewsWire.
[http://www.newswire.ca/releases/April2003/30/c6392.html] and Brown, DeNeen L.,
“Canada Seeks Help From CDC in Fighting Virus.” April 23, 2003. The Washington Post.
85
  Human Resources Development Canada, “Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome News
Release.” March 28, 2003. Human Resources Development Canada.
[http://www.hrdc-drhc.gc.ca/common/news/insur/030328.shtml]
86
  Government of Canada, “Government of Canada Action to Contain the Effects of Severe
Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS).” May 2, 2003. Prime Minister of Canada website.
[http://www.pm.gc.ca/]
                                       CRS-18

      In June 2003, health workers concerned about their safety, including hundreds
of nurses, demonstrated in Canada to demand danger pay, protective suits, and a
public investigation into the cause of the SARS resurgence. Some nurses claimed
that hospital officials were slow to respond to their warnings that patients in other
wards showed SARS-like symptoms. Still, some family practitioners expressed
concern that health officials failed to notify them when the virus first resurfaced. As
a result, some family practitioners fell ill with the virus.87 When the virus resurfaced
thirteen people died of SARS and thousands were quarantined.88

     Toronto was removed from the list of areas with recent local transmission on
July 2, 2003. The last probable case was reported on June 12, 2003. To date, 250
people have contracted the virus and 38 have died of SARS.


                      Congressional Response
Infectious Disease Monitoring
      The rapid spread of the SARS virus underscored the importance of establishing
a database system that would allow rapid and accurate information sharing on
emergent infectious diseases. The Senate FY2004 Labor, Health and Human
Services (HHS) and Education appropriations bill provides over $370 billion for
infectious disease control at CDC, including $25 million for SARS research,
prevention and control. It also includes $50 million to develop a Global Disease
Detection System at the CDC that would enable the United States to effectively
respond to a global infectious disease threat. The Senate bill also increases NIH
funding for emerging infectious disease from nearly $600 million in FY2003 to $1.7
billion.

Capacity Building
     Congress has also recognized the need to strengthen state and local capacity to
respond to a bioterrorist attack or infectious disease outbreak. The Senate bill
proposes that CDC funds for that purpose be maintained at FY2003 levels, $940
million. Part of strengthening state and local capacity includes the support of the
Health Alert Network (HAN). Prior to HAN, one-half of local public health
departments did not have e-mail. The HAN system has been used to share
information about SARS. Forty million U.S. dollars have been reserved for this
purpose in the Senate version of the FY2004 Labor, HHS, and Education
appropriations bill.




87
    The Washington Post, “SARS Takes Toll on Nurses.”                 June 12, 2003.
[http://www.washingtonpost.com]
88
   WHO, “Cumulative # of Reported Probable Cases of SARS.”               June 2, 2003.
[http://www.who.int]
                                       CRS-19

Improving U.S. Response Capability
     The rapid spread of the SARS virus has demonstrated the need to quickly and
effectively respond to an intentional or natural infectious disease outbreak. Congress
appropriated $77.5 million to the CDC Epidemic Services and Response program in
FY2003. The Senate version of the FY2004 Labor, HHS and Education
appropriations bill increases funding for those efforts to $127.5 million in FY2004.
The CDC Epidemic and Response program provides resources and scientific
expertise for operating and evaluating surveillance systems; develops and refines
research methods and strategies for public health practitioners; and trains public
health professionals who respond to public health emergencies and outbreaks. The
Senate version also directs over $578 million to the Health Resources and Services
Administration (HRSA) to combat bioterrorism.89


                            Future Challenges
     The SARS outbreak has provided lessons that may have future application. The
WHO/CDC intervention greatly increased the effectiveness of the global response.
A number of factors influenced the outcome, such as the system of global alerts and
awareness, and access to immediate, high-level research and scientific collaboration.
Coordinated efforts through the WHO/CDC, national governments, and the public
health professionals also led to positive results, as in the case of Vietnam. Dr. Julie
Gerberding, Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, had high
praise for WHO’s leadership during the crisis and emphasized communication and
transparency as key to responding to international health crises. Areas in which
improvements have been called for in the global response to infectious disease threats
include:

Global Interdependence and Transparency
      Lack of transparency in promptly reporting and monitoring SARS outbreaks
directly contributed to the spread of the disease worldwide and had wide-ranging
impacts beyond the obvious health factors. The case of SARS demonstrated that
state responsibility within a globalized world does not end at its borders and that
future containment relies on openness and cooperation in the interests of all
populations.




89
  For more information on Congressional efforts to combat SARS, see CRS Report
RL31937, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS): Public Health Situation and U.S.
Response.
                                        CRS-20

Developing Surge Capacity
     The ability of public health systems and the availability of resources to deal with
a threat like SARS were clearly inadequate. Addressing the need and ability to
mobilize additional resources, both within the country itself, and through the WHO
network during an emergency, would improve the response to similar challenges in
the future. Some have expressed concern about the impact SARS could have had if
the outbreak had reached developing countries with minimal health care
infrastructures, particularly those already weakened by HIV/AIDS. Others have
argued that SARS has underscored the importance of boosting aid efforts that offer
structural support, such as aiding in the training of health care professionals, donating
medical supplies and equipment, upgrading health technologies, and ensuring
universal inoculation against resurgent diseases such as tuberculosis.

Public Fear and Information Disclosure
      The WHO had to strike a balance. On the one hand it was pressed to give
information, and use aggressive tactics of containment. On the other hand, the
information about SARS may have contributed to public panic and anxiety,
discrimination in some cases, and other impacts, such as economic losses. Some
argue that the WHO did not take into account the impact of its decision-making
concerning travel advisories and global alert warnings and that the SARS risk
sometimes did not demonstrate the need for such a response.90 Some governments
in the future may be hesitant rapidly and openly to share outbreak information,
because they may want to avoid potential negative economic impacts, such as job
losses, hotel closures and flight cancellations as occurred at the height of the SARS
crisis. For example, 60,000 restaurant and hotel workers in Hong Kong lost their jobs
or were placed on unpaid leave during the SARS outbreak.91 In Singapore, year-by-
year comparisons showed that tourist arrivals fell 15% in March 2003 and 67% in
April 2003, and hotels reported occupancy rates of only 10 to 30%, compared to
usual occupancy rates of 70% or more during the first quarter of the year. 92

National Response
     The weakness of national surveillance systems and health networks within any
one country can dramatically affect the area and rate at which a disease spreads. If
the SARS virus had spread more rapidly and extensively throughout the affected
countries and for a sustained period, it could have had a significant impact on the
health care systems, and other systems. Those in need of health care, such as those
with cancer, requiring surgery, or those requiring immediate medical attention may
not have been able to receive care. In order to contain the SARS virus, hospital
wards and, at times, entire hospitals were shut down for weeks at a time to


90
     Far Eastern Economic Review, “SARS: A WHO-Induced Panic?” May 22, 2003.
91
    MSNBC, “Record SARS            deaths   in   Hong    Kong.”      April   15,   2003.
[http://www.msnbc.com]
92
  Channel News Asia, “National Wages Council (NWC) wage guidelines for July 2003 to
June 2004.” May 27, 2003. [http://www.channelnewsasia.com]
                                       CRS-21

decontaminate them. Significant resources were used to quarantine SARS-infected
individuals, schools were closed, and other private facilities were adversely impacted.
Such problems caused by SARS illustrate the need to develop effective national
response systems.

Inadequate Funding
      WHO officials and others have argued that there is a need for increased funding
for laboratories and epidemiological research in the fight to contain diseases like
SARS. Improvements to the existing surveillance network and national capacity to
address emergency health issues are also badly needed. For example, GOARN
reportedly needs $200 million to reinforce its network.93




93
     Associated Press,”New WHO Chief Plans More Action on SARS,” May 21, 2003.
EveryCRSReport.com

The Congressional Research Service (CRS) is a federal legislative branch agency, housed inside the
Library of Congress, charged with providing the United States Congress non-partisan advice on
issues that may come before Congress.

EveryCRSReport.com republishes CRS reports that are available to all Congressional staff. The
reports are not classified, and Members of Congress routinely make individual reports available to
the public.

Prior to our republication, we redacted names, phone numbers and email addresses of analysts
who produced the reports. We also added this page to the report. We have not intentionally made
any other changes to any report published on EveryCRSReport.com.

CRS reports, as a work of the United States government, are not subject to copyright protection in
the United States. Any CRS report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without
permission from CRS. However, as a CRS report may include copyrighted images or material from a
third party, you may need to obtain permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or
otherwise use copyrighted material.

Information in a CRS report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public
understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to members of Congress in
connection with CRS' institutional role.

EveryCRSReport.com is not a government website and is not affiliated with CRS. We do not claim
copyright on any CRS report we have republished.
